# How Should AI Learn to Understand the World? | Yann LeCun & Eric Xing on JEPA and GLP
# Spring School AI For Impact 2026, UM6P Benguerir, recorded March 2026; YouTube 8LKgvrNYZz0 (channel melrhabi, uploaded 2026-05-01, 2:31:31)
# Auto-generated captions via yt-dlp, deduplicated, ~1-minute paragraphs. Names may be garbled.

[00:03] Welcome uh uh Professor Eric Xing, who is the president of uh Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence. So, uh before he's uh starting his talk, I would like to introduce uh Eric briefly. Uh Eric Xing is a major figure in uh machine learning and artificial intelligence. He has uh an exceptional career uh spanning over three decades now. Uh not only in artificial intelligence, but also computational biology and uh data science. He's both a uh for someone from the with a very great academic record, but he's also an entrepreneur. He had several startups uh very which are very successful. Uh over the year, uh Eric has made uh very important contributions uh to the foundation of uh modern machine learning or AI. Starting with probabilistic modeling, he

[01:05] was doing a lot on uh Bayesian uh network in the '80s and and later large-scale inference. And uh most likely now is very involved in uh foundation generative AI foundation model uh for uh to answer major scientific questions. Uh Eric is also the first president of Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI uh where he has uh shaped the development of one of the world's most ambitious uh AI university. Uh so, uh Eric is also uh played a major role in shaping the field through his research, through his leadership, and through the many students and colleagues he has influenced over the years. Uh it's a real privilege to have him today to first talk about his work on world model and also to interact with Jan later in

[02:07] the afternoon. So please join me in welcoming Eric and uh I'll leave you the floor. &gt;&gt; Hello. Can anybody everybody hear me? Can you text me a signal? I couldn't see the response. Uh are you guys seeing my uh computer and also hearing my voice well? Please speak up. Sorry, I didn't hear anything. Uh anything wrong with it? &gt;&gt; we can hear you. &gt;&gt; Oh, you can hear me. Okay. Great.

[03:07] &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Well, thank you for the introduction, Eric. It's a great privilege and honor for me to be a speaker in the in your program. Unfortunately, you know, I was originally planning to come in person, but due to the situation in Middle East, I have to do it remotely. So bear with me if there are you know any audio or visual issues. So the title of my talk today, you know, I have two titles. Broadly speaking, I'm going to talk about our recent work toward the next generation AI assistance beyond what I call book intelligence. You will see what that mean in a few minutes. And then, you know, of course, the focus will be on the Pan World Model, which is a stateful uh manipulatable and a long horizon world model for reasoning, planning, and the thought experience. In fact, the background, you know, a movie uh that brought uh many uh famous

[04:08] artworks alive was actually the simulation, you know, from the Pan model, because as a world model, its main function is to simulate real and imaginary world, and that's what actually you'll see from those simulations. Now, let's go back to the background of this body of work. So, why do we even care about uh building more foundation models and the more architectures, you know, for artificial intelligence? Because, you know, uh in my opinion, you know, uh the current models, you often time uh not powerful enough. For example, you know, let's ask this question, you know, how well do current large models understand and reason about the world, right? So, this is a picture that uh I like to share. You know, I ask you, is this a person, this guy, you know, on the right-hand side trying to help that lady or not? I guess uh as uh you know, a normal human being, we have no problem in figuring out, in fact, uh take no time for us to figure it out, you know, whether uh he is helpful or

[05:09] not. But, if you post the same question to, say, the advanced uh large language models, like ChatGPT-5, for example, here is the answer you'll get. It believes that this person actually is helping rather than playing, you know, uh some uh uh bad things against that girl. Uh well, maybe ChatGPT-5 is not the most powerful model. Let's uh or maybe I'm not giving more time to think. Let's ask a more advanced version called ChatGPT-5 Thinking, which is specialized GPT models for reasoning. After spending 16 seconds, you know, uh reasoning about the situation, he still conclude that he appears to be helping. So, that's kind of a a anecdotal instance about how powerful, you know, our current models, you know, is in solving real-world reasoning problems. There are other more kind of parameterized problems that you can use to test, you know, the capability. For example, there is a problem set called

[06:09] detection of motion processing, and you can ask whether these two objects are moving at the same trajectory. And the answer from 01 or 03 is actually yes, which is obviously a wrong answer. Right? And you can also ask a spatial understanding question, say, you know, are these the purple, you know, objects and the red objects, you know, of the same size? Or you can ask a positional question like the left and the right are of the same size? Again, you don't always get the right answer. In fact, you can systematically test the many of such a so-called word model automatic benchmarks to testing, you know, ability to perceive the world or to predict the world. And uh by and large, many of the state-of-the-art models are still quite far, you know, from what human can do in those spatial and physical reasoning, simple ones like you see in Figure 4. Now, given that kind of testing results,

[07:10] why we still believe that, you know, modern artificial intelligence systems are very smart and very intelligent. For example, they can solve a a math problem and win a Olympic gold medal, you know, in the IMO, right? In a sense, you know, I want to first, you know, break down even the definition of intelligence because of this is a very subjective character of a human being rather than a objective metric of a system. Therefore, whether it is a useful metric to measure quality of the system is in question. For example, we believe Einstein is very intelligent, right? You know why? Because you can say that he has a very deep insight in in the universe. He's very good at mathematics and so forth. And we all agree that he has a very bad memory, but he's very good at reasoning. So, bad memory, you know, isn't indicating you know, an intelligence issue, but reasoning is a hallmark of intelligence, right? But on the other hand, we can also, you know, ask is Mozart a composer

[08:10] or was he a composer or not? Pay attention or not? Uh obviously, we all believe he's very intelligent, but why he was you know, becoming famous in the first place? Well, the story carries that in his young age, maybe at the age of 13, 17 maybe, he went to Vatican and heard, you know, from the cathedral, you know, a basilica, you know, a piece of music. And that music was sacred, was forbidden to be copied off that basilica, but he actually just by listening once he could come out and reproduce the score with a very good memory. And then he was declared a genius and even get a knighthood from the Pope. So, good memory is you know, sometimes celebrated as good intelligence. Therefore, you know, intelligence is something that is uh not necessarily objective in in different people's eyes. So, maybe there's a need to even begin our quest by redefining what is intelligence. For

[09:10] example, you know, here I want to propose that we define intelligence in terms of capability, measurable capability, and utility. We use purpose, not sensation or stunts to define the degree of intelligence. And this spirit has been now carrying you know, a lot of wings. For example, recently in a post from the famous mathematician Terry Tao, He studied, you know, uh the intelligence system, you know, the GPTs in a sense using, you know, a lens from a utility standpoint of view. He said that, you know, the AI assistant was very intelligent, you know, uh maybe for some small scale, very useful for some small scale, and the somewhat helpful at a medium scale, and become useful again, and helpful again in larger scales. So, the definition is really on utility rather than, you know, a really, uh you know, a sensation and a feeling, right? And utility is really, uh you

[10:12] know, a very, very defining feature, you know, a way define our own needs and also our capability. We're all familiar with this uh Maslow's pyramid of capability. And using that kind of philosophy or mindset, you could easily define the utility, you know, of a individual or maybe other system using such a similar pyramid, such as the ability to read and write, and the ability to listen, and uh and and and and and and react, uh doing, uh you know, logical reasoning, planning, you know, execution, and so on and so forth, right? So, you could use this as a benchmark to measure not just people, but also system. And then here is how I see the problem start to break down. For example, at the bottom, you know, of this pyramid, we see read and write. And and then maybe uh see and draw. Uh obviously, our GPTs

[11:12] and our current large language models and the vision models seems to be doing quite well already in those space. And at the top, you see something called prophecy. Maybe that's something never achievable by any system unless you have a crystal ball, but what about the middles, right? The middles basically is a space some say already are covered by GPTs and LLMs, and some disagree. So, here is uh how I see the problem start to break down into different tiers of intelligence. What we see from LLMs and the large language models is, in my opinion, you know, a limited form of intelligence because they only operate in the space of language. You could call them booking agents because uh even though they can solve very advanced math problem, they cannot really tell you how to swim and how to interact with physical world because uh that requires the knowledge, embodied knowledge, and the physical knowledge of the universe. And that's actually where, you know,

[12:12] another level of intelligence such as displayed, you know, in this simulated video could be reflecting, which actually draw upon knowledge of space and time, you know, of the physical space. And that leads to, obviously, a model that is not LLM. If you want to put an individual in such a real world, you start to, you know, deal with agents and the agencies. And that requires the system to be able to communicate, interact, understand self and others, and therefore develop new level of intelligence, which I would call social intelligence. And above all, you also, you know, want to understand nature, study the science, develop new drugs, and so forth. And that obviously requires you to have a even extra degree of intelligence, which means curiosity, crea- drivenness, and maybe a you know, the ability to ask right

[13:12] questions, and so forth, which obviously builds on all the lower level of intelligence, social, physical, and lingual, and textual, booking, and so forth, right? So, I think that this is the way I see intelligence breaking down into different tiers, and that's helpful in defining where the model can be positioned against. Let's start from the ultimate intelligence and see what might be a good approach to achieve that. Right, so this is a a one of my favorite sci-fi classics called Dune. I suppose many of you probably are familiar with this this book, right? It basically, you know, played a major role, you know, in inspiring many of the you know, a science fiction legendary you know, movies and so forth that we've seen so far. But in this movie, in this fictional novel, you know, uh the one of the central figure is a legendary individual called the Kwisatz

[14:12] and that he has a supernatural capability uh which can allow him to, say, command armies to win a galactic war or oversee global scale projects like turning a desert planet into a green paradise and so on and so forth, right? So, these are really complicated and the big tasks and which could be the epitome of a superintelligence. But what's interesting in this book is that how he achieve and solve these very difficult problems. It turns out that he has this amazing mental capability of simulating outcomes of all possible plans before he even execute. And this simulation capability actually come from his uh you know, mental, you know, world which was a built from inheriting all the knowledges from their ancestors. So, that's actually a very interesting thing because the methodology some surprisingly similar, you know, to how we build computers and the how we build

[15:12] you know, maybe repositories of knowledges, right? So, the ask the question I want to ask next is that how to build such system, a superhuman. Maybe building a superhuman of the pre-sac is uh too far a reach, but then maybe we could build a system with a similar behavior, you know, and going up the hierarchy of capabilities like what I saw and I wrote in this pyramid from low to high. And then, you know, that basically leads to a design of a system which is a goal-oriented agent acting in the environment and achieving goal in a Don style, which is simulate the plan before you act. And that basically is the setup of my entire presentation in terms of the technical architecture, which, you know, starts from defining a optimal agent that can solve more and more harder problems. So, in an optimal agent, you know, the agent you know, can generate a action upon receiving or seeing a state, you know,

[16:14] from the real universe. And then, optimal agent means that you want to achieve a goal optimally by maybe maximizing the cumulative reward function. And that leads to a solution which is a optimal policy that maximize the cumulative rewards. So, what's the problem with this system? Well, this system basically means that you need to among any things have a direct access to the real universe, which is the world. And that's actually a very difficult thing. For example, uh how can we train, you know, an astronaut or maybe a robot, you know, to go to the Mars before we even are on Mars? Obviously, you need you know, to you know, obtain some capability before you have having access to the universe. And that leads to our second goal, which is that you know, you can maybe build a model which can simulate the universe as a surrogate. And that is basically where the world model, you know, arise. It is a

[17:15] simulation model that can allow you to simulate uh the environment so that you can do optimal reasoning. And therefore, my definition of the world model is a generative model that simulates possibilities. These possibilities are not limited to only physical possibilities such as you know, approving the water, throwing the objects, the physics of the of the objects and so forth. It could also include embodied experiences and emotional experiences and maybe social experiences. And maybe also you know, a mental world, maybe even counterfactual world and many other things. Right. So, imagine such a world model can be built. Then, how does it change your way of behaving, planning for example, strategizing? So, this is a proposal. You can reason by simulation rather than solving optimization. You know, what you have from the world model is a generative model of the next state

[18:15] given the previous state and the action. And then, once you are given a goal for example, you can basically just use this simulator, this world model to simulate multiple trajectories and then look ahead and see which trajectory gets you to the goal and also at the lowest cost and then you execute. So, this is a unique way of reasoning which is you know, different from what we design many computers to do which is to do inductive reasoning and to solve a big option problem. In here, you reason by simulation. There are books in fact about this behavior such as this one, hypothetical thinking. And in our common language, we call them thought experiment. That's actually most you know, common individuals or maybe even great thinkers you know, are used to solve problem, thought experiments rather than solving a big linear system, a big mathematical equation uh systems and so

[19:16] forth. And this approach is a highly flexible and a re-purposeable. You may know the Go at the the system AlphaGo. It is actually, you know, a a world model, you know, plus a Go playing agent, which, you know, the world model is the Go board and also the play rules. And then you can simulate upon a board position multiple outcomes. And then, you know, using a Monte Carlo search algorithm to extract the best one. The same algorithm or the system, once you replace the world model with a different one, such as a self-driving world model, you know, a battleground world model, and uh maybe uh the Mars model, you actually can use the same capability for reasoning algorithm to solve problems in those space. And the the the experience learned from such approach with a world model is also highly transferable, as we also experience in our daily life. For example, we train, you know, the

[20:16] astronauts who can walk on the moon by, you know, letting them to do scuba diving, right, to experience that loss of gravity. A mountaineering, you know, you know, athlete could, of course, you know, be you know, a a soldier, you know, to command ambush, you know, in the mountain regime. And we also know that nowadays and the good game players and could be a good combat soldier because he may be very good at manipulating, you know, weapons like drones and other things. So, now let's go back to, you know, the core question about how to build such a general world model. And here are the four metrics or maybe elements that I found to be key. Representation of the space uh of uh latent uh concepts and the world states. Uh uh architecture to effectively allow to reason, and also objective function for you to train the model, and of course how to use it. So, I will break down, you know, each of these elements more carefully.

[21:17] But, because uh we are also, you know, uh set up a uh a discussion and debate uh with uh Professor Yann LeCun, uh I also want to uh present a few alternative approaches such as I list here in terms of uh addressing all the design constraints of a world model I just listed. Here is a proposal. You know, uh in this particular school of thoughts, it was mentioned that uh the data to use uh for to uh to train world model uh should be image rather than text because text data is too small. Image data are much bigger and much richer. And also the word states should be continuously embedding rather than discrete because uh the continuous presentations are very friendly to uh mathematical manipulations like gradient operations that efficient. We should use a autoregressive model, but we should and we shouldn't use a autoregressive generative model, you know, uh according to this school because uh they, you know, uh are error-prone uh due to uh the

[22:18] intractability, you know, of uh the complex outcome that they have to generate. And uh also, you know, uh the loss function shouldn't be data reconstruction loss as in many generative models, but should be, you know, uh more like a latent, you know, uh representation prediction problem. And then, how to use it? There are proposals like MPC, you know, uh model predictive control. So, this is a proposal which I found to be interesting, especially this one, which is that uh the loss function should be built on latent state prediction rather than data reconstruction. And uh among many of the recent efforts, there are, you know, different, uh you know, implementations of world models that I list here, which kind of uh are not all in compliance with the proposal I mentioned earlier, but they are also share some commonality, which is that it seems like what they care about is to generate good videos and pictures, rather than, you know, focusing on

[23:18] additional functions of a world model such as deep reasoning through simulation. So, in that context, I want to present a a body of work that my group have done recently. The idea come from this paper, "Critique of World Models." If you are interested, you can go and read where I systematically break down, you know, the foundational theoretical insights behind our design. The again, the key, you know, the considerations, you know, for building world model is data, representation, model, loss, and usage. And let me discuss each of them one by one a little bit. So, on data, yeah, you know, data, you know, text data is very small as, you know, you know, argued you know, by Young and many others, you know, the data that we see, even as a child, could be already way exceeding the volume of all the data in text form used to train large

[24:18] language models. However, I want to point out that when we talk about data, it is not just about data volume, it's also about the information density. I would say that text data really give more dense information than pixels, because language is kind of a human embedding of what they see in the real world. And there are complex, you know, you know, contents information such as abstract concepts like regrets and justice that is very hard to be extracted from video. And also, you know, you use language to, you know, enable natural interface of interaction, which is also difficult, you know, through visual cues. Therefore, our proposal, you know, for the training data is to use all modality rather than only text data. And that's the first question. Hopefully, you know, rather straightforward. Representation is another issue. Uh the proposal from the Java school you know, propose or prefer a continuous

[25:19] latent representation because they are gradient friendly. However, we also know that continuous sensorics can be very very variable. And also, if for every continuous input, you compute a embedding, these embeddings are stateless because you know, they are, you know, highly, you you know, variable and unstable. Therefore, you know, it is not, you know, easy to extract semantic meanings, you know, out of, you know, those embeddings. Just like in what I show in this figure, you know, different image kind of a patches can hardly, you know, lead to a consistent semantic embedding, you know, you know, can be stable upon different appearances of the same content. And therefore, our representation choice is to use a stateful and identifiable semantic latent space to anchor the reasoning in both long-term and short-term memory.

[26:19] And the for example, use the words. As I mentioned, the words are human tokens, you know, for embedding already what people see. But also, even for new things that we don't have a word, you can use techniques like, you know, VAE to convert sensory signals, you know, into tokens and so forth. And these representations really enables a more powerful way of capturing, you know, information both in continuous embedding and also in discrete tokens. So, we keep both of them together. And uh we also have a theory to you know uh prove that in fact uh you have the flexibility of building new vocabulary to capture uh information even in continuous signals as close as possible, you know, by playing a trade-off, you know, of the vocabulary size and also encoding lens. So, for the sake of time, I'm going to skip the technical uh theoretical details of that argument and jump to the next dimension, which is architecture.

[27:19] So, the architecture debate, you know, on word model is the most interesting one. For example, the Java architecture is uh like what I drew here. It is a encoding encoding architecture, which basically, you know, uh encode uh the uh the inputs from both the previous time point and next point into latent space. And then you'll build a word model, which makes prediction of the latent space from the previous in embedding to next embedding. This is a very interesting uh architecture, which is computationally very, very efficient because of the loss function is rather easy to minimize. However, you know, uh they have some uh flaws, you know, uh as I'm going to discuss in the debate. So, for example, uh there are uh issues about uh identifiability, right? And uh and also there are, you know, issues about uh collapsing, which I'm going to mention in the second. So, our approach is called a generative

[28:19] latent prediction approach, you know, which is uh a closed-loop, you know, uh architecture with an encoder to begin with and then carries through through a uh a reasoning backbone and then a decoder back into the visible space. Of course, they operate on a mixed latent representation. Therefore, in the backbone, you can have a FMLM-style transformer reasoning backbone and also, you know, a diffusion model like backbone to drive, you know, the numerical signals. And this representation of a hierarchical representation, you know, each level, you know, can, you know, have a proper level of abstractness. And that's basically, you know, a a representation a architecture that we propose to use. And uh And one of the main reason, you know, other than the capability of reason in mixed representation space, is also, you know,

[29:19] the more uh principled trainability. And the loss function definition of this architecture. Because when you use JAPAM or a you know, a latent prediction architecture, you need to define a loss function that is more optimizable and a stable. It turns out that this loss function, which you define on a pair of latent states, is mathematically ill-behaving. It can easily collapse. For example, you can imagine that if I just encode both the previous uh observation and the next observation, you know, into a constant, then you have a trivial predictor that always does things right, right? And there are other conditions which can compromise the utility of the encoder and also the predictor, as I will discuss later, you know, in the debate. So, what we use is a generative loss, which directly measure the difference between the generated, you know, observation from

[30:19] the decoder uh against the actual observation that you receive. And it is a well-defined probability uh motivated loss function. And we can also prove that this you know, generative loss is strictly a upper bound, you know, of the latent loss. Therefore, you know, by minimizing this you know, loss, you also can minimize the latent loss, but the reverse is not true. When you minimize the latent loss, you do not necessarily minimize the generative loss. And on the usage, once you have a world model, how to use it is another, you know, interesting topic that I want to say a few words. The Java school proposed, you know, a a approach of using world model only in the inference time called model predictive control. This is a well-known technique that is used in a factory industrial control and so forth. The

[31:19] idea is that once you have a world model and when you are doing planning or predicting actions, you can always use the world model to simulate, you know, a few steps. And then you can solve a bounded optimization problem by finding the best path among the world states and also the simulated actions, and then you take the action sequence. Well, this is mathematically an elegant approach, but it is very expensive because in many real world problems, you may be simulating or solving a plan that involves hundreds of steps and in each step, you know, hundreds of thousands of action options. And that's becoming, you know, a intractable operation problem under MPC. And also it has to be done in real time when you actually solve problem. So, our approach in using the world model is a combination of MPC, but also a offline RL algorithm where when you

[32:20] are not even doing anything as a you know, AI agent, you can still simulate the world model, you know, just in your system and learn policies, you know, of a possible simulated world states and world space. This is more like a go player not only, you know, learn in during the actual play, but also do simulation or self-play, you know, when he's not in a match, and still gain more skill. And we found that the world model gives you that flexibility. And we actually can have a theorem proving that the RL algorithm, you know, that you learned, you know, and then stored in associative memory as a policy, won't compromise, you know, your actual and action, you know, you know, when you deal with a real world situation, because you always have the other option of going to, you know, a real, you know, MPC-based automation approach, if need to. But you don't have to always do that. So to summarize, you know, our world

[33:21] model architecture, which is called the generative latent prediction architecture, is, you know, a a system like this. It contains, you know, a it has consistent understanding and prediction of the world states. And it is generalist high-level world dynamics, plus a low-level perception details, so two type of reasoning backbones, enabled by a large language model pre-trained, and also, you know, a you know, multiple low decoder. And then you can also incorporate instruction tuning and action encoding through this backbone. So based on this framework, we recently, you know, implemented and released, you know, an instance, you know, of the world model called Pan. And just as you can see, Pan, you know, is a initial version implementation of this architecture, which use, you know, a

[34:23] next latent state prediction, but also, you know, a you know, a integrative diffusion LM fusion architecture, you for the reasoning. And uh it actually predicts, you know, multimodal observations, which allow you to communicate with other agents, and also perform generative supervisions. And also, the building blocks in each of the components and the module here is actually compatible with other, you know, foundation models that you can, you know, obtain, you know, from the community, such as the existing large language models, VLMs, DINO, and so forth, with a canonical interface. The learning is based on next token prediction and the generative reconstruction, and also reinforcement learning, as I mentioned earlier. Uh against a particular technical issue, you know, raised by the the JAPA approach, which is that you

[35:23] know, reconstruction, you know, of complex visual signals can be expensive. We actually also have some additional technique to mitigate, you know, that computational cost. For example, we can design a particular video diffusion decoder, which do partial reconstructions, you know, of the outcome, focusing on only the important elements, you know, uh through a a curing kind of a mechanism that, you know, allow you to to do re-weighting, you know, of a different contents. Recently, we also, you know, released the you know, developed a new technique, which is you know, a working at the the infrastructure level, you know, to speed up the very computation, you know, of LLM reasoning, and also of a diffusion model, based on, you know, diffusion distillation, sparse attention, and also fast LLMs. We turn It turns out that this approach is a highly efficient that it can generate, for example, the video,

[36:24] you know, 10 times faster than the playout of the video. So, for the first time, you know, in in in the community, we can actually produce video contents faster, you know, than what the video content itself, you know, takes. And this type of technique, again, can, you know, reduce the cost of, you know, large language of, you know, the the GLP architecture of the world model to make it a more viable and more able to leverage on complex data. So, let me show you some, you know, demonstration, you know, of this PAM model. To qualify as a world model, you must go beyond just the image generation, but enter the world of visual understanding. And also visual world simulation. So, what understanding mean? It's very hard to really, you know, to articulate it very clearly, you know, you know, the the the the property of understanding. So, here, we

[37:25] take a more operational definition, which is the, you know, manipulability. You can actually manipulate contents through text prompts continuously to drive and steer the production of the contents. For example, here, you know, I have a current state. If I want to go one step forward and say move forward, you see this happening. If I say, you know, go lift off, you see this happening, which kind of tells you that the model actually understand what is in the picture. And depending on what you want to see happening, they will branch out into different next states. You can go further and put some weather conditions. Likewise, you see, you know, a nice, you know, simulation, you know, in compliance, you know, with your your prompts. So, the PAM model is not a task-specific, you know, model that only focus on a narrow type of contents. It is very, very diverse and universal. and you can see many of the interesting scenarios,

[38:26] you know, simulated from here. For example, this scenario caught many people's attention because it is simulating, you know, a car behavior, you know, let's see if I can play it or not. Yeah. You know, this is a a video which leads companies like Waymo to be very interested in because to train a autonomous driving car, you know, you need to have enough video signals in total really uh start illustrating and training, you know, behaviors of rare accidents when you are running to that. But such videos are very very rare if exist, you know, in real world. And therefore, our world model can help to even do data generation of those rare scenarios. Here is another video showing you step-wise manipulability, you know, of you know, of the the possible words. Again, the video itself is not fascinating like what you will see in Sora or Gemini and so forth, but it is a a different type of video which, you

[39:26] know, is not prescriptive, you know, or, you know, bulk programmed in a single passage. You can actually go into the video and in any seconds, you know, type in, you know, a new action, a new direction, and the the model actually doesn't know what's going to happen in next. Only after you type in, they are going to start simulate what is going on next, which again, demonstrate that the model knows what is in the video in terms of a macro with oven, you know, you know, the balls and also the the bottles and so forth. Again, we use this type of task to demonstrate understanding, you know, of the possible words. Again, coming to evaluation and demonstration, evaluation benchmarks of world model is actually a problem by itself because the current visual based so-called world models really are testing something not so fundamental to a world simulator. For

[40:27] example, they test you know short-term short horizon metrics like frame level fidelity you know or motion realism and so forth which of course you know is you know cute and useful for high video quality but they have very little value to generate long horizon only consistent scenes for reasoning and planning. So we come up with a new set of benchmarks which measures you know long horizon consistency you know high-level controllability and also planning qualities. And this is basically you know a set of more explicit definition you know of those metrics action simulation long horizon forecast and the sitting planning and and and the reasoning. Again along these tasks we see very few models able to achieve very good score because that's exactly what the current models you know have been largely

[41:27] ignoring. So our uh you know paper you know did a very systematic comparison you know of of example action simulation fidelity long horizon forecast and the simulation reasoning especially the simulation reasoning. You simulate to solve a problem rather than to you know generate a pretty you know video stream. And those kind of functions are rarely if ever considered you know in the past as a quality measure of the world models. So let me just give you a quick kind of demonstration about how these tasks each look like. For example here is a simulation of what we called long horizon and the branching possibilities. You started from somewhere and then, you know, you can enter different action prompts and the steer the movie, you know, multiple steps, you know, into different next word or next states. For example, you know, you you

[42:28] you ask the the flower to bloom itself or you do golden light spell, you light a fire or, you know, you you know, you make you enter, you know, a tunnel and so forth. You can really, you know, drive the whole, you know, possible word, you know, further, maybe even indefinitely into the next word and actually can come back to its original word because the states, you know, you know, it's a stateful simulation. Therefore, the past the history were actually remembered. So, this is useful for you to do, you know, simulation of planning and the thought experiments. Here is another instance about how to use the world model to solve a problem. So, here, for example, the goal is to, you know, start from this particular scene where you have three bins and the middle bin had the four yellow objects, the four yellow cans, and then, you know, you have the the blue tray on the

[43:28] right and the the the middle tray in the in white and you want to now achieve, you know, equal split, you know, of the bins between the blue tray and the white tray. Right. So, this is a simple task. How can you actually, you know, do simulation of reasoning to find the right movement to achieve that? And this is basically what the world model is able to demonstrate. It basically can simulate multiple things, you know, picking the can up, putting the right or right or left and and then, next, you know, put it back or continue to pick the next thing and so forth. So, there is a one path which leads to, you know, a equal split of the beam, you know, through, you know, a simulation of a possible actions and next words, and others failed. So, before you do this action physically using a robotic arm, you could already see the whole thing very quickly in your brain. And then the arm can now get a proper, you know, a

[44:28] sequence of actions to execute this goal. So, that's basically how I see the world model to be able to uh get used, such as leading you out of a complex maze if you get confused or lost your way. So, there are a lot of use cases that a pen model could offer, and they here are just examples about the how, you know, they can be used to simulate uh you know, uh sports, industrial, you know, robotic manufacturing environment, you know, physics, or even social training. And I think this is uh you know, really a very promising direction, you know, uh for world model to pursue, you know, uh beyond just generating, you know, nice movies. Okay, so I have a few minutes left. I want to go back to, you know, our original goal of a super intelligence and the super agent. And uh so, now we have a world model, and our goal is to build a goal-oriented agent acting in the environment and achieve goal in a doomed fashion. Now,

[45:29] the environment is given by the world model already, and what's next? It turns out that this uh definition of the agent is just as confusing, if not more confusing, than the world model out there, right? For example, there are many agent systems these days, you know, from different companies. Uh I have to say that uh uh it may be a little bit inappropriate to really call them agent rather than a pseudo agent because uh the main focus of these tools is really automation, you know, a finishing a job, and use different tools, and so forth. Does this really suggest agency? What what human agency is? What human agency is a very very different uh you know, property. First of all, human are very versatile. You know, they use the one cognitive system to solve all these tasks, which involves, you know, physical intelligence, social intelligence, emotional, and many things. And therefore, it's functionality it's more versatile,

[46:31] you know, than than any of the existing, you know, agent systems that you see, right? In terms of uh you know, uh you know, uh adaptation, you know, uh innovation, communication, and the continuous learning, and so forth. But even more so, you know, uh agency, you know, our human agency, our biological agency had uh a very very interesting uh cognitive element, such as the definition and awareness of self, the boundary between self and the others, so that you can define collaboration and teamwork, and also the clear recognition of a goal, and accordingly self-regulation, and the self-organization and reflection, and so forth. None of the current agent systems had anything to do with these type of qualities. But I think this is really needed if you want to define a truly autonomous agent that can, you know, uh you know, uh rely uh less, you know, on external instructions, uh

[47:32] and still able to to accomplish complex tasks. Therefore, we define, you know, the agent model, you know, uh uh with a set of uh you know, characteristics and abilities closer to human agency, such as actively perceive the goal, reason about the purpose, and and the reason about purpose for actions, and then learn from experiences, being able to adapt and to generalize, and uh so forth, right? And so going back to, you know, the element of the agent model, again, here is what we see to be useful: goal, believe, world models, and planning. And then going to say, you know, propose, again, you know, a a draft architecture, you know, for these type of agent models. So I want to start from what's out there already in terms of empowering agent models. There are now two conventional schools of thoughts, you know, for agent models. One is uh uh a policy-based kind

[48:34] of approach, you know, uh you know, which which is a fast reaction and the built on end-to-end policy models that can output action directly, right? They have the advantage of being very very simple and also being very very computationally efficient and rapid. They don't maintain a model of the world. It's purely reflective, you know, based on perceived states of the world and then roll out the action using a policy model. The other approach is a model-based approach, which is actually closer to what Professor Yann LeCun was also advocating. They're using a world model, you know, to really instruct and the guide the agent into come up with the rational actions. Again, you know, the advantage is that it really opened the possibility of long-term reasoning and data efficiency without necessarily to train you know, a complex policy model, but on the other hand, you know, obviously, it is expensive on the other hand because you

[49:34] need to always do simulated reasoning or MPC, I would classify these two approaches, you know, into what we know as the system one and the system two cognitive reasoning. One is based on prompt price policy, you know, learned from reinforcement learning and do right like a subconscious reflective kind of activity. The other is more like a inference time planning based on, you know, MPC or MCPS, you know, using a model-based approach. I don't think these two, you know, should really be put against each other. In fact, I would propose, you know, in our model, what we call the assistant three, which, you know, not only can do both, but also have a additional function which we call the regulator or, you know, deliberator, which, you know, can instruct the system when to use system

[50:35] one, which is cheaper, but short-term, or when to use system two, which is more expensive, but longer-term. And that's basically a proposed architecture which include a world model that is a pre-trained and a policy model that can be trained previously or can continuously being trained. And also, you know, assistant three reasoning, which is a configurator, you know, for when to plan plan deliberately or when to stop plan and act directly. So, the architecture is a little more complicated. You see the configurator which will deliberately choose a policy model or a world model depending on, you know, the distance or the quality of the effects coming out of the previous action and so forth. And there are other designs that I'm going to skip the details just to wrap up. So, to validate, you know, this

[51:36] hypothesis, you know, we actually recently also built a prototype, you know, of a self-regulatory agent model uh, called a SLAM. And which is uh, presented on the right. Uh, on the left is a classical, you know, LLM agent. Which is uh, really a black box that you prompt it and they will basically do reasoning, you know, uh, for you, you know, uh, using a uh, unknown, you know, uh, you know, uh, thinking paths or, you know, uh, chain of thoughts. On the right, you have a a system that is uh, a white box where the configurator will allow you to deliberately choose, you know, when to plan, how much to plan, and also, you know, and uh, and uh, using uh, what uh, you know, uh, intermediate results, you know, to uh, replan or to evaluate. And the results shown here shows an interesting contrast. We found that uh, using this uh, you know, uh, system three architecture, you

[52:36] know, we were able to achieve very, very complex planning and the reasoning behavior with a relatively smaller model, you know, uh, at the capacity, you know, uh, comparable to a model that is uh, two, one or two orders of magnitude bigger. As you can see from here, this graph on the x-axis show many models of a different parameter sizes, and the y-axis is the score of the performance. You can see that the SAM model, you know, is uh, you know, comparable in performance to the best model out there, such as a DeepSeek 2 and the Chinchilla 2.5, which are literally hundreds of times bigger. And this model is only 20 or 30 billion parameters. And the way to achieve that is because there is a cost-effective uh, planner in the system that allow you to do more smart planning. And this is another demonstration about uh, you know, uh, the uh, comparison uh, of uh, our agent model compared to other

[53:36] models of a comparable sizes. Apple-to-apple comparison, you can see that uh, you know, uh, the reasoning per token is much smaller and the overall score is strong. Here is an insight about the what's happening inside, right? So, in a self-regulatory agent model, you actually started with a much richer initial plan, which allow you to deliberate and re-plan when necessary, even for, you know, a very complex goal. But, the overall steps required to arrive at the right solution, in this case, in a specific question, it's a how many native indigenous crocodiles were found in the Florida, you know, from some years between. It's a very very interesting problem that requires you to do planned search and the literature review and analysis of data in multiple steps. So, our model, you know, had you know, a couple of different plans and at the end of the reached the right answer in 45 steps. Whereas, you know, a model that is not pre-trained with reinforcement learning

[54:36] for the policy for the configurator, you know, takes a much more steps and get the wrong answer. And the the the external benchmark model that we use, you know, in fact, also take longer steps and get the wrong solution. So, this is basically what we'd like to see, how the world model in the future can go hand-in-hand with the agent model to really go toward a higher level of intelligence. The world model here is really used for perpetual retraining of, you know, the agent system in a infinitely possible world. And the this is actually, you know, a kind of a realization of such a a game plan. We already used the pen world model to build a initial version of the game model where you can simulate, you know, long horizon, high fidelity interactive simulation experiences. Long horizon here is important because that's where you

[55:36] really can learn quality policies and also you know models you know you know with enough you know complexity closer to the real world you know roll out you know of complex scenarios. And the world model you can see is a really flexible you know in responding to complex action or prompts and the come up with different outcomes. And accordingly the agent or the benchmarks can also be put on such a world model which really you know measures the system against the task completion. In this case for example you know opening the right the correct door to go in you know or find the you know say you know you know the parking spot you know for your vehicles or find the you know ice cream you know you know selling station. You know out of many possibilities and so forth. Right? So you can use you know the the the the world model to simulate

[56:37] the scenario and the outcome and then let your agent be trained. So to wrap up so this is basically just a beginning. With the world model and the agent model you can always compound it with some more complex scenarios. For example a regular world model when add additional agents into it becomes a super world model of a physical world plus many agents. And then the super world model you know can you know lead to a super agent model which you know really think about the world in certain attractions. For example economist think about you know the world you know as you know a collective population rather every individual. In terms of a financial and economical behaviors. So this type of a nested you know structure you know of a super world model and super agent model can allow your planning and the reasoning to go up to a certain level of complexity and the granularity. So, to sum up, uh what I presented just now is a road

[57:38] map go beyond book intelligence toward physical intelligence and uh social intelligence and the philosophical intelligence. And I believe that, you know, a simulation of reasoning, you know, with the world model is a very promising, you know, a path uh toward building uh true intellectual and intelligence and problem-solving capabilities in a very complex scenario because, uh you know, they are scalable, transferable, and also very very flexible. They actually can come, you know, come up with a very very complex scenarios and generating very complex, uh you know, possibilities even from a simple, you know, root models. Um and that actually, you know, give the world model, you know, a lot of potential, you know, in, you know, and achieving, you know, high performance even, you know, with limited amount of resources. And of course, I talked about uh the issue about the representation

[58:39] learning, you know, and uh architecture, which is still a ongoing debate, which I again look forward to exchange, you know, with Jan in the next few hours. Uh that's all for my first talk. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Thanks. Thanks a lot, Eric. It was a very great talk and so we have the time for So, Jan LeCun is already online, but I think he he asked us to spend to have We have 5 minutes now, so for some preliminary questions. And then I will leave the floor to Jan. So, one or two questions now from the audience. Okay. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much Professor for your presentation. I I was wondering about the architecture of GLP. In slide 34, you were mentioning that you support

[59:39] both symbolic and continuous reasoning. Could you a bit elaborate more about the symbolic parts? Thank you. &gt;&gt; The symbolic part is basically a large language model, right? You basically, you know, I use the word token, you know, to establish, you know, long horizon chain of events and effects, and then you will reason in that space. Then the the numerical, you know, continuous reasoning is based on a diffusion model. So, you basically have a backbone that builds on pre-trained large language models of choice, and also, you know, diffusion models, you know, of specific domains. &gt;&gt; As we have time for another question. &gt;&gt; Uh hello Eric. My name's Alan Rosen, based in Paris. Um I was wondering the one of the

[60:39] critiques on world models is the whole notion of causation, and that simulation doesn't equal understanding, and it seems like world models are stuck between rung one and two on the causation kind of ladder that I think Judea Pearl developed. Just wondering what do you How do you see the development in the months or the year ahead in terms of improving that? &gt;&gt; I I need to understand it more about the what exactly you mean by causation, right? And is that uh you know, the cause cuz they have a chain of thoughts, which actually form a causal chain, you know, of representations, you know, inside the system. If desired, they can be exposed. In fact, with the world model, you actually could already simulate, you know, possible worlds including counterfactual worlds. Therefore, you know, all the possibilities, you know, that to deal per is imagining, you know, from a

[61:40] different configurations of causality in a sense, in my opinion, can be simulated. But it's it's where I think world model is you know, you know, not of course exhaustively, you know, giving you all possibilities, right? But you know, it it gives you a competition advantage, you know, of you know, focusing on the high probable outcomes and then start already, you know, picking the best action sequence based on that. &gt;&gt; Okay, so now it's thanks a lot, Eric. Thanks again, so we can a big applause, I think, and uh then we we need to we will welcome our so Yann LeCun, so it's a great pleasure to welcome Yann. Uh so Yann LeCun, everyone knows Yann, so we'll be very brief. He's of course one of the central figures of in the history of artificial intelligence. His work helped lay the foundation of what is called modern deep learning and he's still very active, so he

[62:40] continues to shape uh some of the field's most important directions today. Uh of course, Yann is widely recognized as one of the pioneers of neural networks especially through his landmark contribution to ConvNets uh which played a very major role in bringing machine learning into real-world applications. And but beyond these foundational achievements, Yann has remained over the most 40 years of more of his career one of the clearest and most influential voices in AI. So he has been of course awarded by a Turing Award, which is a recognition of his work. What makes his perspective especially important for today's discussion is his very long-standing commitment for to a broader vision of intelligence. He was exposing that of course 3 years

[63:40] ago in this uh uh in this uh room by the way. So he's So about systems that can learn, that can predict, that can reason, and build internal models of the world. So it's a it's a real pleasure uh to have him with us today. Uh so please join me in welcoming Yann LeCun. Okay, one We have to wait 1 minute. So you have 1 minute to relax. So So what what will happen? So I will explain. So 4 minutes, so Yann will give a a short talk on on his vision of world model, and then there will be a debate between Eric and Yann.

[64:40] Uh so first a debate, and then they will take questions from audience. So So the way it will be organized, I will give you the microphone. And also please tell who you are. Okay, it's it's better for them to know whether you are students or you are a professional because the way to answer is not exactly the same.

[65:42] &gt;&gt; We have time for one question for Eric. Waiting for who has a question? &gt;&gt; I need a break. He's ready. He's ready. So, okay. &gt;&gt; So, Jan speech in now. We see Jan. &gt;&gt; Yeah, same. &gt;&gt; Eric &gt;&gt; Uh so, let us speech to uh speak to Okay, so for the So, you can have a Jan, you can start. If you want to give some quick uh summary of your What's your vision of the world model and then we do the uh relative to the debate. So, so Eric has uh spent 1 hour explaining what is his vision and so you have time now to explain what is your vision and then we will discuss. &gt;&gt; Okay. I guess I have 10 minutes. &gt;&gt; 10 minutes &gt;&gt; I have slides, but &gt;&gt; Yeah, you can you can use use the &gt;&gt; Can I use slides? &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, of course.

[66:42] &gt;&gt; I'm I'm connected to another computer for the slide, but I'm I'm I'm I'm in in the waiting room, so &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; Uh If you guys can admit me. &gt;&gt; Okay. You can start and we go to the regime. So, sorry. &gt;&gt; Okay, you can share screen. &gt;&gt; No, the it's it's a different computer. I'm I'm connecting a second time, but I'm the I'm in the waiting &gt;&gt; connection. &gt;&gt; The two connections. &gt;&gt; One is called the Yanu Camp presentation.

[67:49] There's a Yanu Camp presentation. &gt;&gt; Can you retry uh Yanu? Can you retry your connection? &gt;&gt; Okay. Sure. Let's try it again.

[68:59] You don't see me? &gt;&gt; Are we Are we going to

[70:15] It's a 1 minute.

[71:46] &gt;&gt; It looks like he's All right. Okay. Uh So, sorry for the Sorry for the issues. Um So, I'm going to talk about world model and I'm going to make a an argument that uh world model must must not be generative and Eric and I have had that discussion before. Uh I don't know if his thinking has evolved on it. Uh I uh I I could not listen to his talk before, so I'm not sure uh what the debate is going to be about, but I'm going to argue for the fact that world models cannot be uh generative. Okay, so uh first of all, um um humans and and animals uh learn world models. That's That's what we use for uh for planning, for reasoning, for uh predicting. Um uh everything that That's what's That's what allows us to react

[72:46] intelligently. Um and babies learn learn things during the first few years of life um mostly by observation and of course by interaction. So, how do we reproduce this kind of learning with machines that you know allows babies and animals to learn uh uh models of the world. Um so, first of all, we learn this through high-bandwidth sensory inputs like like vision, like touch, like audio, uh and and other modalities. And uh this is a far cry from from uh LLMs that learn purely from text. Uh text is very low bandwidth and it's uh dense information, but there is a very limited amount of it. Uh something on the order of uh 10 to the 14 bytes uh publicly available uh on the web. Whereas for video, um we have basically an unlimited supply of visual input. So, um uh clearly, we can learn we can get

[73:47] machines to learn a lot more by watching video than by just uh reading text. Um So, there there is uh the the reason why we need world models is because we want to build agentic systems, systems that uh can uh plan actions to accomplish particular tasks. And uh the the reason for world models is that you cannot imagine building a reliable agentic system without that agentic system being able to predict the consequences of its own actions. Okay? It's very difficult to act without having the ability to predict the consequences of your actions. You can act in familiar situations, but you cannot act in new situations unless you can predict the consequences of your actions. That's what allows you to plan. Um so, what that means is that you absolutely need world models. There's no way around it. You you can make all the arguments you want. Uh in the end, if you have a a world model as depicted uh

[74:49] at the bottom here, let me show a a bigger example here. You perceive the world, you uh, get some idea of the current state of the world, perhaps combined with the content of your memory. You feed that to your world model. Um, and your world model you you also feed it a hypothe- hypothesis for an action sequence that you imagine taking. And what your world model does is that it predicts the the state that will result from this action sequence. Or in fact, it's going to predict the entire trajectory of of state resulting from this action sequence. You can feed this, um, predicted states to an objective that computes whether a task has been accomplished or not. And perhaps to a bunch of guardrail objective that measures to what extent the, um, actions that are being followed are safe, uh, or not. Uh, and then by optimization, you look for an action sequence that minimizes those objective functions

[75:52] according to the prediction of the world model. Okay, so inference is performed by optimization. Um, so you figure out an optimal action sequence that will, uh, satisfy the the task objective while, uh, satisfying satisfying also the guardrail objective using your world model as, uh, uh, the the means as the tool to predict the, uh, outcome of your of your actions. Okay, so inference is by optimization. That's a very important point. Now, all of this has to operate in some abstract representation space uh, that represent the state of of the world. Um, and of course, if you have a world model, you can run it multiple times in an autoregressive fashion, uh, to to predict the uh, outcome of a sequence of actions. And ultimately, what you want to build is a hierarchical world model and uh, I'm coming to this in a second because I think that's a very important concept. When humans and animals plan complex tasks, we don't plan it in terms of

[76:52] elementary actions. Which in the case of humans would be millisecond by millisecond muscle control. We plan at a material level and then we work our way down to the low level actions that are muscle control. But we do plan hierarchically. What that means is that we need our world models to be hierarchical. And so that's a far cry from generative approaches. So a generative model will look at a piece of video for example running through some encoder and maybe a decoder or predictor that predicts the rest of the video. Okay, and you would train the system by minimizing some sort of cost function some discrepancy between the predicted video and the observed continuation of the video. I've been trying to make this work for the last 15 years. And essentially failing for the first 10 of those 15 years. Including using all kinds of latent variable models and things like this. This is a note paper that's about 10 years old. And what you see is the predictions

[77:52] that you produce when you train a system to to predict videos at the pixel level, the predictions are blurry. There's really no way around this. One way around it is to use latent variable models. But like diffusion models or or things of that type. But it really doesn't solve the problem because most of the information in the video is not predictable. Most of what happens in the real world is not predictable. When you train a model to predict all those things that are not predictable you kill it. It simply doesn't work very well. If I take a video of the room that everybody is in right now listening listening to me and I point the camera to the left side of the room and I slowly rotate the camera and I stop and I ask the system tell me what's going to happen next in the video." There is absolutely no way that system can predict at the pixel level what everyone in the room looks like. It's just impossible. The information is just not there. And so, you would have to, you know, put this in some latent variable, but then

[78:53] you hit another issue uh with latent variables. So, my solution to this is what I've called JEPA, Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture, which is represented on the right here. And so, basically, the idea of JEPA is that you do not attempt to predict pixels. You do not make this a generative model. You encode the uh part of the video you want to predict, which is the the variable Y here. Uh and you produce a representation of it called SY. And And then, what the system uh uh does is that it predicts uh SY from SX. It predicts at the representation level, and it does not attempt to predict every detail at the pixel level. Uh Now, there is a a slight uh complication with training a system like this, which is that the system is happy is is happy to collapse. It It's going to you know, if you just train it to minimize the prediction error, it's going to ignore the inputs, and then produce a constant representation, and

[79:53] now the prediction problem becomes trivial because the representation are constant. So, you have to prevent that from happening. And basically, what you have to do is have some measure of information content for the output of the encoder, and attempt to maximize that. And that's the complication in training a a JEPA. But, we have a bunch of solutions for this now. Uh Now, let me uh insist on this point that uh learning hierarchies and abstract representations of observations is really fundamental. Um I could, in principle, explain everything that is taking place right now between us in terms of elementary particle physics, or even quantum field theory or even atomic physics, I could simulate every atom uh you know, in in the room I'm in and in the room that you are in and uh and you know, simulate uh everything at the atomic level. And it would explain everything that takes place. But of course, you know, it would not be a very useful simulation. First, because it would be incredibly

[80:53] expensive. Uh but also because it's very likely that the simulation would quickly diverge from reality. So, we never describe the dynamics of a group of people in terms of atomic theory. We describe it in terms of psychology or sociology or something like that, right? Uh so, what I've drawn here is a hierarchy of different uh uh abstractions from quantum fields to particles to atoms, molecules. In the living world, it's proteins, organelles, cells, organisms, individuals, societies, ecosystems. And all of those levels in this hierarchy is a different way of representing reality which ignores some details about the level below. And this is why we can explain to some extent what goes on uh when people are talking to each other at the level of psychology but not at the level of particle physics. Uh physicists do this all the time. Science

[81:53] does this all the time. In fact, every level in this hierarchy is a different field of science. A field of science is essentially entirely defined by the level of abstraction at which you represent reality. Um so, this idea that you have to find an abstract representation to be able to make predictions, I think is absolutely fundamental. And that essentially destroys the whole idea of generative models. Um so, uh what can we use those Jaka world models for? Uh an action condition world model is a world model that, you know, given a current state of the world SX and an action you imagine taking, can predict the next state of the world SY. And you can train that system using observation data uh with with actions if you have them. And eventually you can probably use those world models to control complex systems that can be only modeled at the phenomenological model level

[82:54] without uh particularly for for systems that whose behavior cannot be reduced to a small number of equations. Um I took here the example of a turbofan engine, but it could be a chemical plant, it could be a patient that you're trying to treat, it could be a whole robot and its interaction interaction with the environment. Uh so a lot of applications for this in the physical world. Um and we're not going to be able to do this with generative models. Um and so that's the way we we're training Jaka. We have a bunch of results on this using something called Sigreg, which is a regularization term that uh attempts to maximize the information content coming out of the encoder. I don't have time to describe what it is exactly. Um it's uh an idea of that has to do with uh making sure that the distribution of points that comes out of the encoder is basically isotropic Gaussian. Uh more recently we've actually built uh world models based on this method. Uh it's

[83:54] called Low World Model and it uses the Sigreg regularizer to train the the world model. You can see the URL of the website here where there is kind of some code, a few demos. And there's a paper. And and this works reasonably well. Um I'm not going to um show you demos or anything, but um but there are predictions or surviving situations in robotics or simulated systems. It's still at relatively small scale, uh Um, but it works. And and it works relatively well. Um, so I'll conclude I'll conclude right here. Um, you know, can we uh build or train our causal Japa models to provide us with uh essentially a way to build universal causal models of any complex systems that we observe through measurements and sensor data, including things like human cells and organs and bodies, but also complex uh systems, uh manufacturing plants, uh or or whatever else. And that's the

[84:56] challenge, I think, of AI for the the next few years. And we use this for for planning. And I'll uh I'll stop here. Thank you very much. &gt;&gt; Is better now? Okay, thanks a lot. Okay, so it's time now. Thanks thanks, Jan. It was very clear. So, I think there is a lot of debate between being generative or not generative. So, I think we can start with that. I think I will leave the floor to Eric first, and then we take a question for audience. So, Eric first, what is what are your first reaction on on Jan's uh uh vision on world model and embeddings and prediction in the latent space? &gt;&gt; Yeah, well, first of all, thank you Jan for the excellent presentation. You know, to be

[85:56] honest, you know, uh even though people thought it's a debate, it's probably, you know, a venue for us to seek, you know, common ground and build consensus and also maybe a enlarge, you know, the methodology toolbox because I fundamentally agree with Jan that the prediction, of course, needs to happen in abstract space. Yeah, I think there are some technical issues about the how to validate the prediction and also how to make the full pipeline, you know, consistent and end-to-end because at the end of day, one function of the word model, you know, is to generate contents. And then you use a plugin, you know, on top of the system the impact encoders and the reasoners, you know, with a new plugin of decoder or it is a end-to-end system that can be trained and also validated in the same time. I think these are technical points I want to maybe elaborate a little bit and I love to hear your thoughts as well. So, I think, you know, we pretty much

[86:57] started the same from here, right? So, we need a word model, you know, to be, you know, you know, a a simulator, you know, to really train agents, you know, with a lot of possibilities and that's essential and it has two basic predicates, you know, at the the arrival of a truly capable agents. And then here, you know, I think I summarized Young's points, you know, quite you know, carefully already and I'm not going to repeat. So, I'm going to now offer, you know, maybe a point-to-point, you know, rebuttal of some of the points he made and offer a slightly different view. First of all, I think it is really two design choices between Jeppa and GLP. Jeppa, you know, is to really implement, you know, a latent space that is what I called a partial entity due to purely insurmountable numerical issues because, you know, when you bring the information, you know, from you know,

[87:58] the observation data through encoder into latent space, it's a lossy encoding and it is very hard to recover the information unless you reconstruct where you come from. Whereas the GLP is a full pipeline of a closed loop of encoding and decoding. The purpose is not to generate, but the purpose is to use the generated outcome to validate. Therefore, there is a chance for, you know, a subspace that is compatible or maybe, you know, even even equivalent, you know, to the true reality space. But now let's get to the points. Data. Young mentioned about, you know, the importance of a video data, which I totally agree and I'm going to maybe add one more dimension to that. I think video data is useful, but it also can be misleading and therefore it's not adequate. For example, we all see this picture. It's a very very famous picture, you know, you know, in the in the '70s, you know, which, you know, generated, you know, a huge movement in the US because what we see here from a

[88:59] pixel is really, you know, a person kill another person. What is not known, you know, of course this is the direct kind of interpretation from the video model only, you know, someone kill some other people. But if you know the context, you know, of this whole story beyond the video, you actually know that this one being killed, you know, is actually, you know, a criminal, you know, that killed civilians and the shooter is actually, you know, a general that is, you know, catching him. Again, you know, the context is not available in the video. That's why I say when we train one model, the video itself is not providing the world knowledge entirely. You need to have additional information of text. So that's kind of a my simple answer to the data usage. Representation, likewise, I think only based on encoder generated continuous signal without, you know, using the symbolic knowledge offered by the words is also inadequate. Because for example, you know, we want to infer, you know, you know, this, you

[90:01] know, long-term, you know, event of apple getting rotten over the a months Without the support of a, you know, the text for symbolic reasoning, it's very hard to use the a visual kind of a simulator to generate that kind of a possible words, right? And there are other things like a counterfactual in reality, uh or not reality, but possibilities, and agent interactions, which actually, you know, leverage on the fact that we human use visual and also lingual, you know, approaches to interact and also to reason. Therefore, I think on the representation level, uh the fundamental reason for me to advocate a mixed representation, continuous and symbolic, really really uh is out of that concern. Now, come back to the architecture, which is the Young's core argument. Um this is basically the encoder strategy, which makes uh a word model to be a predictor of the next latent states. Uh Young already mentioned about the

[91:01] numerical, uh you know, collapsing issue, right? Uh which uh again, you know, uh I'm not going to uh talk too much, but I want to elaborate on what is behind it, you know, due to this collapse, and also, you know, uh uh where um issue can be fixed. So, in the encoder, you know, uh decoder strategy, I think uh what's happening is that, as Young mentioned, you can, you know, easily, you know, I have a trivial encoder to put everything into a constant and still make good predictions. And uh but the core kind of design here is to really turn encoder into a predictor, rather than, you know, a transformer of representations, because they need to, you know, create a representation that match the next representation that is also produced by encoder. So, their eventual function is a prediction function. And when you have a prediction function, you invariably have information loss, because of whatever you use this, you

[92:01] know, for making the good prediction will be discarded in the encoding. And that information loss is very, very hard to recover unless you have a different objective, which will be making use of that information. And that is why a generative approach, you know, is kicking in because in addition to make the latent prediction good, that prediction also need to be reused to produce, you know, the you know, the actual observation data, which actually, you know, requires you to keep more information even though they may not contributing to the prediction of the next latent states, but they may be useful for predicting or generating the next image, which exists in reality for verification. Therefore, there is really a divergence or maybe this, you know, a difference on how information can be preserved or can be discarded. The generative approach allow you a way to do full reconstruction and therefore keep all the information in place regardless whether they are predictive

[93:02] or not in latent space. And that leads to basically these are two, you know, pathway, you know, toward, you know, the full, maybe journey of the data, right? On the Japa path, you know, you will start from observation and you are likely to have a lossy encoder which leads you to a incomplete latent states and then, you know, you will be building a predictor built on that states and then, you know, that predictor will be, you know, used for predicting the next one before in fact ever it come out to match with the real data. But on the hand, the GLP approach, you know, technically, you know, gives you, you know, a closed loop where whatever next prediction need to meet actual qualification, you know, in generating the observation. Now, one, you know, major, you know, critique as Young mentioned about the making the next the pixel or next image

[94:02] prediction is that the impossibility is too complicated. It is non-hazardly even predictable. Um, that part, um, I think there are, um, how should I say, you know, it's maybe a intrinsic difficulty that lies in the very, uh, interesting essence of world modeling that you how to basically make that so-called unpredictable thing actually predictable either through architecture design or computational innovation. Because if we choose to make predictions uh, only, you know, on the thing that we believe to be predictable, you know, then that importance of, uh, the subset of information to be predicted is governed by the training data you use. And then when you train a model, you basically already use the training data to define what is important, you know, in the prediction. But when you go to text, uh, testing data, you know, the generalizability issue is lost because, uh, you know, you really may already lose the information,

[95:04] you know, uh, when you establish, you know, good latent predictors on the training data. And therefore the saliency, you know, who defines that is something, you know, uh, that is, you know, uh, sensitive in the space of a generative model but less sensitive or maybe even agnostic, you know, in a generative model. Efficiency is another issue. I already in my talk show a number of examples about how to construct smart decoders which, uh, can partially, you know, generate, you know, salient information or important information, you know, in the output and allow them to be validated. And also there are recent developments which actually allows, uh, you know, for example, a very, very fast video reconstructions, you know, uh, at a time that is even 10 times, you know, 1/10 of the time the video roll out can play. So, there are engineering issues that one can use to uh um to actually serving to circumvent, you

[96:04] know, some of the computational issues that you know one can Sorry, I need to look for a particular page. Okay. So, I think that's, you know, where my main point is. I would say, you know, the completeness and the correctness of information is not be compromised, you know, to be trade-off with efficiency and the computational resource because those issues are engineering issues which can have a continuous involvement. But, the architecture itself, you know, if wrong, then you lost information permanently and cannot be recovered. And last but not least, I want to say a few words about the reasoning. Because, you know, you know, of this you know, focus, you know, on both, you know, you know, generative capability to produce long-term consistent uh signals to be validated,

[97:04] we have the opportunity to test, you know, a word model which should be tested in that way in long-term consistencies and also planning capabilities, which you know, requires, you know, obviously, you know, a richer set of data representations both for system wide and assistant to reasoning. And the the latent encoder uh and the the the latent predictor based on encoder in structure is very very difficult for us to extract representations of that granularity, you know, in a flexible way to enable those long-term consistency inferences. And also, there is another engineering issue, you know, which we found to be a very interesting. The GLP architecture, which is you know a encoder-decoder architecture, make use of a many existing tools such as you know existing strong VLM based encoder and you know

[98:04] diffusion based decoder and also LLM or diffusion based you know a reasoning backbones. That actually you know make the system open you know to many of the existing work. For example, our recent speed up you know of the video gen took advantage of a very fast large language model K2 that we developed ourselves not originally even for this model but it can be plugged in. On the other hand, you know, a latent you know space predictor word model had a representation that is very very difficult to interpret and be compatible with existing systems built elsewhere by other teams. Therefore, it is tricky you know to really you know build a sustainable you know you know you know toolbox you know a tool you know systematically you know ramp up the size of the model and also to make use of you know other you know training strategies and you know modules

[99:04] available elsewhere. So I want to wrap up by showing some of the you know evaluation benchmarks I already mentioned to invite you know community to benchmark and the measure the war model in a more careful way because even you know the from the results I just see and also from many of the results that we had in the past, much of the benchmarking of the war model are still not quite in place. They focus on visual capability and the visual generation rather than task solving. So this long-term consistency and the planning quality is something that has been so far ignored, including for example in the recent we Java paper. We do find that the validation, you know, really still focusing on, you know, more visual computer vision type of tasks of segmentation and and and object recognition. And also the interface, obviously, you know, is a little bit

[100:04] difficult, you know, for language models and other models to be kicked in. I would wrap up by saying that these type of new tasks, which we recently published, you know, you know, to hopefully call for a new platform to validate, you know, what model functions can be tested, you know, for, you know, the capability of new world models. You know, I think uh for example, here in the continuous branching in our simulations. And uh and uh you know, you know, uh games, you know, that can create different possible worlds for different agents, uh where I see, you know, a greater possibility, you know, to try out better Java, you know, or GLP in terms of their generalization power. So, with that, I want to wrap up by maybe summarizing some of the takeaway points where Young and I could deliberate and and

[101:04] maybe make additional comments. I think the real, you know, a kind of um uh angle, you know, a divergent angle from Young and me, first of all, you know, we agree we will be working on latent space. But the representation, you know, should it be stateless or not stateful, continuous or discrete, is where technical implementation make a difference. Then the role of decoder, you know, it could be viewed as a distraction, you know, obstacle because of the unpredictability of a complex content. but if you flip a coin, it could also be, you know, a challenging validator to provide a closed loop, you know, through action facilitated latent reasoning over realizable world states, rather than just imaginary world states. And of course, the reasoning part I said already can be a mix of symbolic and numerical reasoning. And there is also the mathematical issue. Regularizer is

[102:05] a little bit difficult to characterize. Therefore, you know, we need to carefully design a regularizer to make the even the training itself computationally nice behaving, whereas the GLP generative model does not, you know, suffer from that kind of collapsing, you know, or degeneracy issues. From the user end, the debate between, you know, Jan and me seems to be catching a lot of attentions from the non-technical world, which didn't care really about what kind of technology we use. They care about the functionality. And I want to single out a few functionalities that has been really, really, you know, highlighted. For example, people want to see a model to be able to generalize into unseen words. And Jan also mentioned about the generalization to the unseen is very, very important. And here, the approach between Japa and GLP really radically different. One is a latent space optimized for predicting unverified latent states. But the GLP is

[103:05] really, you know, built on, you know, a what hopefully can be a lossless encoder and the intended with a reconstruction decoder that can unfold the compatible, but the previously unobservable future. Therefore, I think that function are more likely to be realized. Long-term horizon latent stability is also very important. And our approach is to use again, you know, observation that's a a dark rail, whereas the Japa approach is heavily relying on a good design of the regularizer. The training and deployment, as I already mentioned, you know, one is a more assemblage, you know, of available tools, you know, using standardized representation and the latent architecture, and the Japa is a a little bit more, you know, less kind of transparent in terms of how to interpret the internal representation and how to port those representations into additional models.

[104:07] So, these are just some observations I want to put here. I think it was out you know, you know, really elaborate too much. I see, you know, these two pictures to be you know, contrasting, you know, a Japa and a GLP. You know, recently in the latent space is to me like a a you know, a a in a sitting in a monastery, you know, doing meditation and the thinking through all the mental exercise. But on the other hand, you know, a regenerating, you know, the observation data, you know, in the training through latent representation predicted from the previous one is more like a missionary in the working in the field, you know, constantly interacting, you know, with real world and people. Although obviously, you know, there are a lot of misinformation, noise and so forth, but it's a different way of uh learning. And the which one is better? Well, we need to let the results, you know, to tell in the end. That's my answer to Yang's presentation.

[105:09] &gt;&gt; Thanks. So, that's now Yang, it's your turn. And then we'll leave the room question for the room. So, Yang. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, Eric makes a a number of good points, but I'll uh that. Uh, this into a re- rebuttal to make the debate more interesting. Uh, So, first of all, you're absolutely right that Japa uh, produces a partial representation of reality. But, my argument is that this is uh, an indispensable feature. It's not a bug, it's a feature. The world is messy, and noisy, and predictable. Most of it Most of the information in the world simply cannot be predicted. In fact, physicists even have a name for this, they call it entropy. Um, let me take a an example. If I give you a box, uh, filled with air,

[106:09] uh, there's not much you can say about it. But, one thing you can say is that if I start, uh, heating up the box, the pressure will increase. Okay? And in fact, we have a formula for it, PV equals nRT. Now, this is a very abstract representation of an incredibly complex underlying process, where you have a ridiculously large number of molecules bumping into each other, and bumping onto the wall of the box. And that creates pressure, right? And And the more you heat the the gas, the more the molecule will fast, and uh, and it creates more more pressure. Now, nobody has ever been able to actually simulate this at the level of individual molecules. It's completely impractical. And so, you know, uh, in physics, we we call this entropy, um, and that allows us to ignore all the irrelevant details, and just work at the

[107:09] level of things that we can predict, like PV equals nRT. If we increase the temperature, the the pressure will also increase. And vice versa, by the way, if you increase the the pressure, the temperature will increase. Um, so, you know, we cannot predict individual molecule positions. It's useless. It's way too expensive. It's completely impractical because you can't We can't even measure the positions. Therefore, we absolutely have to ignore details. There's no way around it. This is This is only way to understand reality is to ignore details you cannot predict. Um, so, that's exactly what JEPA is designed to do. It's designed to find a trade-off between uh extracting as much information about the input as possible, but also uh to minimize the prediction error. So, as a result, JEPA extracts only the information that it can predict and ignores all the information that is simply not predictable.

[108:09] It's exactly what we do uh when we uh model a a complex physical system. We ignore the details that we cannot predict. We call this entropy. Um, so, there's a real fundamental thing to this also, which is that if we want to make a long-term prediction, we have to ignore more details about the the prediction. If I if I uh try to predict individual molecule uh positions and velocities, I'm not going to be able to do this over the body of an airplane or even a wing of an airplane to compute uh drag and uh and lift, I'm going to have to find an abstraction where I cut the air into little cubes and I represent the state of the air into each cube by a velocity, a pressure, and a temperature, and then I solve the Navier-Stokes equations. That's an abstraction already.

[109:09] Um, when we uh you know, want to figure out the the effect of a drug or or something on a human cell. Uh we don't actually simulate you know at the level of density functional theory or molecular dynamics. Uh we do that as a as a material level with biochemistry. Um I'm going to use your car car crash argument. You say I mean your car the argument about about the car. You say that um it's better to kind of preserve all the information and and reconstructing uh because you never know what information will be useful. Whatever information you cannot predict is not going to be useful. I guarantee that. And so that's exactly what Japa is doing. It says, "Okay, there's a lot of things I cannot predict. And since I cannot predict them, I'm not going to be able to use them for planning anyway, so I should I should as well uh ignore it." A generative model like like GLP is going to have to

[110:10] when you when you have a car that drives along the road, it's going to spend a huge amount of resources modeling an enormous amount of detail like the random motion of the trees of the leaves of the tree bordering the the road on a windy day. And that's you you know for a fact it's not only completely useless, but it's also completely unpredictable. If you attempt to train your system to make those predictions, you kill it. It It simply doesn't work. Um So um So that's the argument for the fact that uh ignoring details uh by not attempting to reconstruct is and and and producing abstract partial representations of reality is a feature. It's not a bug. It's a feature. It's necessary. We have no way uh no other way to actually do that properly. Um In fact, this is very connected to the notion of invariance. When uh we have an encoder that represents uh

[111:10] uh, uh, you know produces an abstract representation of reality that eliminates details about the input. This is the same phenomenon that uh, happens when you train a classifier or you train any kind of machine learning system, uh, you know, a multi-layer machine learning system. It learns hierarchical representations in such a way that not all details are preserved. Only the details that actually are useful for the task are preserved. Uh, if it's a supervised task, for example. Um, and so again, the the trick there is how you eliminate all the variabilities on the input that uh, you know, are irrelevant for the task, right? If you do handwriting recognition, the style of a character is irrelevant. So, you want a representation that is invariant to the style, maybe to the size of the characters, maybe to their uh, orientations and distortions and noise and things like that. Um, it's the same argument. If you want to make prediction, you have to eliminate all kinds of details of this

[112:11] type that uh, are relevant. And the way you define irrelevant details is details that you you cannot predict. Um, uh, you had an argument also about the advantage of using text. Of course, that's an argument that uh, applies to humans. Doesn't apply to most animals. Uh, they don't have language. They understand the physical world pretty well. They can construct abstractions. They can do hierarchical planning. Um, they have world models. There's no question about that. Uh, So, you don't need text, but if you have text, you might as well use it. And there is no objection to using text in the context of a of a Jeff architecture. It's it's entirely possible. And uh, I'll stop here. &gt;&gt; Eric, now. &gt;&gt; Well, thank you. Yeah, yeah, very very insightful uh, comments. Um, I think that there isn't a disagreement that uh, you want to uh, keep only the useful information, you know, uh uh for the prediction.

[113:11] And also, you know, the latent prediction is using a subset of the information for making a prediction. I think that major uh divergence are maybe two points. One is about how to ensure that uh that prediction itself is correct. And also, how is useful. I slightly disagree that whatever that is uh not predictable is useless. In fact, you know, if a medical doctor, you know, uh we uh you know, take a tissue samples, we take the sample and we keep it. Even though, you know, uh in my first experiment, I may not uh you know, understand all the nuances, but I can always go revisit. In a sense, when we pretrain a model, we not only want it to uh limit itself to something that is immediately predictable, but also to have a trade-off of something that uh have high value and it can be still kept. And uh in the GLP approach, you know, the observation uh is now, you know, automatically used,

[114:12] you know, as a uh mechanism to have a voice in terms of what information is useful. In addition to, you know, being useful for making the latent prediction, but also in reconstruction. Then reconstruction, of course, is always a uh um a very, very uh how should I say, you know, diverse or wide definition. It's not necessarily at a pixel level, you know, match-to-match, right? It's also, you know, uh about uh you know, a uh maybe um more information-rich uh representation, you know, that you want to recreate to sanitize and validate the latent prediction. So, in the practical implementation, you know, we still uh trying to uh prevent, for example, issues like hallucination and also the balance in the between pre-training and the post-training and the fine-tuning. In the jackpot approach, it is uh

[115:14] challenging, you know, to I don't know to rely on a pre-trained model that is filtering out, you know, most of the information that is not directly immediately, you know, predictable in a in a particular type of data. For example, you know, I want I want full training data in the base on car under certain scenarios, but there are other informations, you know, of the view and maybe other dynamics. You know, when you discard it, it does make a good training model for that only car movement function, but it is very hard to generalize. Therefore, it cannot be a very general purpose model. When you fine-tune it, you know, for a downstream application, those information has to be relearned. Right? So, I I think, you know, there is always a balance where you know, having the GLP architecture actually GLP can strictly subsume, you know, the jackpot if you turn off the generative function.

[116:14] And also, you can also, you know, re-weight the generative function in terms of how much you respect that in terms of the reconstruction loss. So, that but on the other hand, it opens the door for looping in the reality so that you don't hallucinate for too long. And also, you allow you, you know, a flexible time span in terms of coming out, you know, from the latent space and the validate not in every frame or every second, but from to time to time at a affordable trade-off of computing and the resources, you know, to uh uh to create that kind of a balance and a guardrail on the quality of the latent prediction. Um in terms of, um, the computability, um, I think, you know, uh, with the recent, you know, dramatic improvement, you know, of, uh, uh, new architectures for, uh, sparse diffusion and the

[117:14] uh, and the sparse attention and so forth, reconstructing, you know, high-quality images becomes a lot cheaper than 10 years ago or even a year or 2 years ago. So, I would ask you if, you know, you can, uh, very, very cheaply, you know, uh, reproduce or generate, you know, uh, information from latent space to directly, you know, leverage on, you know, rich information in the in the data, entering data. You know, would that be an option, you know, to enhance, you know, uh, a latent presentation or latent prediction architecture, you know, with the benefit of, uh, additional information from the observation? &gt;&gt; Thanks. So, you have a quick answer and then I will you quick, uh, and then I will give the, we take question from the audience. Okay, so, question from the audience? Just introduce yourself.

[118:23] &gt;&gt; Hello. Um, my name is Bahia and I am a cybersecurity engineering student. And in my field is built on the principle of minimizing noise to find a threat. Um, Dr. Eric, you've mentioned the training trap and the idea that we should focus on purpose instead of just mimicking a human-like generation. From an engineering perspective, it feels like the current approach for generative models, uh, word models, is an attempt to catch all fishes in one basket, aiming to protect every pixel or token and ended up with a basket filled with irrelevant data. Considering the massive issue with data scarcity and annotation, why shouldn't we abandon the generative requirements entirely? Does the panel believe that a non-generative representation focused prediction architecture like GPA is the only viable way to reach AGI without drowning in the the noise of data-heavy generation? And specifically, is it time to stop forcing

[119:25] world model prediction to predict every single every pixel as a primary goal and instead move toward a hierarchical &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. &gt;&gt; approach where non-generative GPA GAPA core handles the underlying logic and at the same time pixel generation is only treated as a secondary task-specific layer? &gt;&gt; Uh yeah, thank you all for that question. I I I do want to make a very very special clarification. The goal of the GLP and the world model is not about predicting pixels. You know, world model has its own function as I we both Jan and I emphasize, it's a simulator for world possibilities for reasoning, right? So, it's like a you train a student in university, you know, you need to put examinations. It's just a new form of a mean particular form of examination which connects the model, you know, in its ability to produce certain real-world data. But the goal, the evaluation you'll see, you know, uh not the not the

[120:26] training score, but the actual evaluation of the model you can see, you know, from our work is on planning capabilities and uh long-term consistencies. There is a no such a score that we actually use to measure pixel-level reconstruction. This is a training score, not actually a evaluation score of the model. So, just that's something I want to make clear. There has been a lot of a confusion right now. You know, really taking generative model to be, you know, the only purpose of generative model is to generate pixels. No, that's not. Generative model basically has many, many other purposes, and uh producing pixel is a validation score that we use to qualify some of the generative aspects of the model aspects. &gt;&gt; Yann, perhaps a comment? &gt;&gt; Well, um I mean, the the the question was a little bit loaded uh in the sense that uh it basically made my argument. So, I'm not going to uh contradict the

[121:27] you know, the the person asking the question here. Uh uh I obviously have been in favor of uh only representing the uh information that is predictable and eliminating things that is not predictable, which uh in many cases is a way to characterize noise. That's what we call noise. Or entropy in physics. &gt;&gt; This is a question? &gt;&gt; Yeah. Hi, thank you. Uh my name is Khalid Tahir. I am the co-founder of Top Shura AI Lab, Topal Garay AI, and Toot AI. Uh it's uh quite inspiring to uh listen directly to both uh distinguished figures, Yann and uh Professor Eric. Uh the my question is uh I'm really struggling uh to understand this uh deeply nonlinear world. Chaotic, complex, beyond complicated. And then uh whether it's uh GLP or G but

[122:33] uh how can we uh we claim that we going to simulate the world model. Uh Uh, so, are we shortened by coming up with uh more realistic terminology first? And the second question is, uh how can we approach the such complex world uh with uh linear algebra or the computation the foundation of the computation is based on the linear um a product of the human beings? So, is am I missing something here? This is the the question. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Well, um I mean, certainly the models that, you know, we we've been using now for decades in deep learning are non-linear, right? The main operations, of course, are linear operations, so like you know, matrix vector products and things of that type. Uh but, you

[123:34] have to have non-linearities in them, otherwise there is no point having multiple layers in your architecture. Uh so, that that's the big, you know, the the big thing that took years uh to convince people in the machine learning community that having multiple layers of interspersed linear and non-linear operation actually had intrinsic power that shadow systems didn't have. Uh I've, you know, I used to have that debate with people, uh including with Eric's uh uh PhD advisor. Uh you know, Michael Jordan, you know, way back. This was 20 25 years ago or so. Uh So, uh the fact that at the bottom we use linear algebra is is irrelevant to to this. We basically have uh you know, ways to approximate complex non-linear functions. That's that's what that's what deep learning is is used for. Uh Now, the It's It's modeling complex

[124:36] systems, there there is a a number of uh systems that we can reduce to a small number of equations. This is the traditional way of building models. You study a system, you figure out what are the relevant variables, and then you write down write down a bunch of uh uh differential equations generally, if it's a if it's a physical system. Uh and then you can, you know, simulate at some level of abstraction, you can simulate the behavior of the system by solving those equations, by integrating the differential equation. So, computational fluid dynamics is an example of this, right? You can simulate the flow of air around an airplane uh using this uh you know, Navier-Stokes equations. Uh but in fact, um it's almost too accurate to be useful. What you really want in the end is just a few numbers about the characteristics of the of the uh of the airplane um like drag and and uh and lift. Uh if you could actually directly predict

[125:36] the drag and lift using a a neural net, you know, from the shape of the airplane uh and the speed of the airflow and the angle of attack, um you would pretty much have all the information you want. Um and so, people are actually doing this. They're building uh neural models to directly predict the variables they're interested in. They're not trying to predict the next state. They're they're just trying to predict the relevant uh uh variables. Uh and so, that that's a way of scaling and simplifying the problem, but then we're getting outside of the domain of self-supervised learning because that becomes supervised learning now, right? You have to have the data uh to train your your system uh to make those those predictions. Uh self-supervised learning is the context in which the data you train the system on does not have any human provided uh labels or or outputs, uh but basically, the output is also the input, right? You you're predicting part of the input from another part of the input. For example, predicting the future from

[126:36] the past, right? That that's the that's that's what self-supervising is. Uh uh is based on. But uh but to handle complex systems, what we need are phenomenological models of those complex systems that ignore all the details that we just cannot predict. Again, we're not going to simulate uh a a a oil refinery or chemical plant at the level of molecules. We just can't do that. We're going to do it at the level of you know, a very abstract level. Like, you know, what happens if I change this control variable in my chemical plant, in my power plant, or my turbojet? Uh what's going to happen to its state? Can I plan a sequence of actions to bring the system to a particular state? We're not going to be able to do this either for uh human cells or let alone for human bodies. What sequence of uh uh drug or treatment uh uh should I plan to bring a particular patient uh you know, to control the blood sugar of uh level of a particular diabetes

[127:36] patient? You know, it's it's a planning problem, you need a model of the patient for that. And uh and and it's a very complex system, you're not going to reduce it to a small number of equations, you're going to have to train it from data. &gt;&gt; So, we have &gt;&gt; Yeah, I want to add to uh what Jan just said. You know, uh in fact, you know, uh complexity can come out of a very very simple systems as Jan just I know mentioned about the aircraft and similar like uh I know fluid dynamics simulations. If you look at the for example, the game of Go, the rule of Go, you know, can be written within one page, but it generates already infinite complexity. So, the potential, the capacity of the world model isn't really lies in how complex the model is. It's really about the how much insight it can learn from data. You know, uh and then, you know, use it as a simulator. In fact, you know, people, you know, compute, you know, atomic energy, you know, in the very early time using MCMC. It's actually based on very simple rule, but you can simulate already, you know, the the you

[128:36] know, the some of the critical physical, you know, properties of you know, materials. I also want to add to what Jan just said in terms of again, back to the the importance of abstraction. And also, in my opinion, the also equally if more not more important, you know, a qualification of the abstraction. We need to stay, of course, with a proper abstractions, you know, to make, you know, to to be actionable and also to really you know, you know, really make use of predictions. But then, there are many abstractions, you know, which may, if not verified, you know, you know, have a verifiability issue. When people, you know, learn physical knowledge and biology and so forth and extract possession, these are in triple knowledge, people can actually, you know, build knowledge upon and do something with. But the using a model, you know, to learn automatically isn't guarantee you identifiability and also,

[129:36] you know, consistency. That's why, in my opinion, you know, validation through generation is a critical path. We use, for example, validate physical laws by making predictions of the position of the star. And therefore, we go to the star and go measure and compare the differences. That's really how a abstract theory is established. But the in world bubble training, non-link right now is not yet, you know, in place if we ignore the generative part where the real observation are brought into validate the latent laws and latent predictions. &gt;&gt; I like it. I like your example of predicting the position of a heavenly body. Uh because there's an interesting point about this. If I give you all the data that we've ever learned about Jupiter, Mhm. Uh it's an incredible incredibly large amount of information. A lot of it has to do with the weather, the dynamics of the planet, you know, the atmosphere, okay, radiation, okay, you know, magnetic field, all kind of stuff, right? But, if I ask you to predict the position of

[130:37] Jupiter in 100 years, you only need six numbers. You need three positions, three velocities, and you can predict the position of Jupiter in a century. And so, that that's actually precisely a a perfect example of of the fact that uh to make predictions, you don't actually need that much information most of the time. You need to extract the relevant information. I mean, the the genius of Newton was to figure out what is the right representation &gt;&gt; Mhm. &gt;&gt; of uh you know, positions of planets and their their dynamics and and the fact that you the the entire state of a of a body in motion is basically positions and velocities, also rotational uh uh you know, velocity, but but but you know, let's ignore that for for for a moment. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh and then could you start with the reference reference frame uh you know, figuring out that the you know, planets rotate around the sun and things like that. So, um that's a perfect example of like uh you know, what allowed people to make

[131:39] accurate prediction about position of planets was precisely to figure out the appropriate representation for position basically relative to the sun, realizing that planets rotate around the sun. Uh uh And then, uh you know, having you know, deriving very simple rules for the dynamics, and it turns out the relevant variables are in uh very low dimensional, very you know, very simple. &gt;&gt; Absolutely, you know, uh I I think there is uh one dimension is about uh you know, we not we will not always know, you know, what we actually need to predict and uh want to predict when we do that. For example, you know, in in in astrophysics, the uh discovery of the red shift and it is not because they are collecting the red shift data. They don't they don't have this concept yet. It's just collect, you know, the background data of the of the of the universe and then suddenly find you know, a mismatch you know, of you know, the data you know, with the actual kind of calculated outcome. So, in my So, the the the way I see in latent representations you know, to be you

[132:39] know, inclusive and informative is that they don't want to too strict simply build on current prediction because one of the users was asking, you know, how to generalize you know, the word model into unseen words. There are utilities of the word model that we don't even know and you want the information to be in the representation so that they still can carry out into, you know, extrapolated functions and maybe unseen universe. &gt;&gt; No, I agree that, you know, we should not know in advance what information is going to be useful. You want to extract as much information as possible. But, my argument is there's no point extracting information that you cannot use to make predictions. That you cannot predict. It's going to be useless anyway. You you might represent it, but if you can't if you can't predict the dynamics of it, why extract it? You're not going to be able to use it to make predictions. And so, that's that's the point. &gt;&gt; of prediction lies in in my opinion, the observation space, not in the latent space, right? Because

[133:39] the way predict the star &gt;&gt; That may be where we disagree. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But, I think predictions should be should be performed in in latent space. And of course, it's a trade-off because if your representation is not informative, then prediction becomes trivial. So, so there's a trade-off between maximizing information and minimizing prediction error. And this is exactly what Jepa is the Jepa training criteria are are doing. &gt;&gt; We have we have time for two questions. And the two questions we have one question there. Okay. &gt;&gt; Hi Eric, Hi Yan. Alan Rosen, Dean of Ecole des Ponts Business School and also Professor of Innovation. And more importantly here, I am the self-designated representative of the layman who are in the audience. I'm wondering if there's not a deeper, even though it seems like you agree on a lot, like but there's a deep philosophical difference in the signal and noise

[134:40] approach. It seems like Yan, you're seeing mostly noise in a messy world and just like the Jupiter example, you know, you only need those six data points, that's the only signal. Whereas Eric is saying, "No, everything is signal if you know how to look." And if we go back to the video that you showed at the beginning, Yan, that you have been struggling with for 10 years, it seems like Yan is saying, "I prefer a blurry video over what Eric might want to see like a perfectly perspectival perfect video that shows the girl not blowing out birthday cake but spitting an olive pit." And I'm wondering if I've understood correctly your philosophy on this. &gt;&gt; Uh we partly. Yes or no. So, I I don't prefer a blurry video. In fact, the the fact that when you force a system to make a single prediction, it it produces a blurry video is a sign that uh you really cannot

[135:42] train a system to produce pixels if you make point prediction, so a single prediction. So, of course, the argument against that is to say, "Well, don't don't predict a single point, predict a distribution over uh over videos." The problem with this is that uh you cannot make uh you cannot accurately and usefully represent distributions over the set of all possible video frames. Later on the the set of all possible video clips. We don't know how to do this. We generally when we want to represent a distribution we we go through an energy function and then we do a what's called a Boltzmann distribution. So you do exponential minus the energy and you normalize and you get a normalized probability distribution. You you over the space. But generally this normalization is intractable in high dimensional continuous spaces. You simply cannot normalize useful distributions. So that's what led me to a formalism

[136:43] called energy based models which basically is kind of a weaker form of uh probabilistic modeling. Uh But what I tried to do and failed was to basically use this kind of techniques uh you know, modeling distribution approximately or using energy based models to make predictions in at the pixel level. Now we have techniques like diffusion models that work better than the stuff I was I was you know, I was working on 10 years ago. But but it's still very imperfect in the sense that the diffusion model will produce a nice looking picture, but there's absolutely zero guarantee that the model is not what's called mode collapsed. It is which means it's going to produce uh pictures that look like the ones that you trained it on, but it does not actually represent the whole set of potential uh potential uh uh uh legal images. And so I had this epiphany about uh 5 6 years ago

[137:44] where you know, more than that actually. Uh When I realized like you you really do not want to predict pixels and the the the the main reason that uh made me kind of switch my opinion about this is that we had tons of experimental results on training uh self-supervised system to represent images. This is not video. This is um you take an image and you transform it or corrupt it in some ways and then you run the original image and the corrupted image through encoders and you try to make the representations identical of those of those two things because they're really two different views of the same scene. And so the representations should be the same if you want them to be invariant to those transformations. Um a lot of people were trying to train vision systems in a self-supervised manner uh through reconstruction. So, take an image corrupt it or transform it in some way uh

[138:44] and and then train some big neural net to reconstruct the original image. There's There was a huge project at at Meta on this uh called uh MAE, masked autoencoder which is a form of denoising autoencoder. And diffusion models are kind of a form of that as well. Uh and that project basically failed. There was a huge amount of resources that were devoted to this project and the representations that were produced by those systems really were not good. People are using, you know, VAE, VQ-VAE uh all kind of and, you know, masked autoencoder uh uh or or denoising autoencoders. None of those techniques ever produced competitive representations using uh uh for for images. Like, none. Absolutely none. Uh the only methods that ever produced competitive representations for image uh understanding are all joint embedding architectures that do not attempt to reconstruct. And the empirical data on this is

[139:45] you know, incontro- incontrovertible. There's There's like tons of evidence. Um including things that actually Eric mentioned in his talk like like DINO. The The DINO features are trained without reconstruction. Uh in fact, that's one of the big uh advantage. Um the the you know, I Jepa I Jepa features are trained without reconstruction. Uh MoCo, SimSiam, SimClear, this this whole menagerie of methods of this type where you know, the the representations uh seem to be you know, giving pretty good performance. Uh but they none of them is trained by reconstruction. All attempts to train image representation by reconstruction have failed. And so, it's a pretty clear signal that you should not reconstruct. It's very, very clear. It's empirical. It's not Yann's intuition. It's, you know, hard data. &gt;&gt; If I may add to that, so if first of all, thank you for the question. I want

[140:45] to approach your question from a two angles. One as you said, a philosophical angle. What is noise? What is signal? And the other of course is engineering, so how to really make the prediction efficient. I was originally trained as a biologist. You know, in biology world, in the biology they are very opinionated. They have a strong opinion about what is noise, what is bad data, what is good data and so forth. I've always been a good advocate of all data are good data because even if it is not pointing to the signal that we want to predict, they point to your behaviors and maybe platform, you know, systematic errors and you know, other you know, instrument errors and so forth. And then in the past, we don't use that because our technique, our ability to model this data are poor. We used a linear function regression to model biology data. But now with transformers and foundation models, the actual has been changing. If you look at how people train large language model for example, there's no bad data. Data are all thrown in and they basically settle by themselves in some way unless you really want to have

[141:45] a guardrail of behavioral alignments and so forth. Otherwise, you take all data. I think uh you know, first of all, in here, I want to have a model, a framework, that has an open kind of you know, a position, you know, on what is important, what is a noise, and what is a signal in the data, so that representation can accommodate what may be needed in the future, even not now. That's a kind of a philosophy position I want to clarify. Now, on engineering part, you know, in fact, up I'm coming much younger than Young in terms of witness the history of uh you know, technological bottlenecks in the past of making pixel predictions and the video matching and so forth, but I also witness that the in the past several months, you know, or years, you know, this reconstruction, you know, technology, you know, you know, fueled by stronger diffusion models, and maybe a next generation model to come in the next couple of weeks or months, who knows, you know, will continue to

[142:45] improve our capability of making the predictions. So, now, in a sense, I want to make sure that you know, the model architecture itself is not a function or bottleneck of a current technology, our inability, you know, to compute, you know, video generative made data or pixel generation. In the sense, it if you have you know, a 10 times 100 times more powerful, and which is happening right now in some of our collective research, you want to quickly, you know, uh benefit and leverage on those new information, and in my opinion, using you know, a reconstruction error is one of the best way of using those improved capability of computing and architecture to make use of observation data. &gt;&gt; We we take a last question, and then we wrap up. &gt;&gt; Hello everyone, so it's a short one.

[143:45] &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; We can hear you. &gt;&gt; Okay, so uh I'll be fast. Okay. So, don't you think that the current testing techniques and metrics are not as compatible with world models? Also, if the concept of helping models also can't think in a worldly manner but not being limited to text or to interact with the world, shouldn't we borrow some tricks from our own brains by abstracting multiple concepts or ignoring them momentarily to interact with the whatever task is at hand to achieve AGI? And my last question is if that's the case, how would you determine the concepts or information to sacrifice basically? Thank you for listening. &gt;&gt; Okay, there's there's a a very uh complicated question uh so implied in your in your question.

[144:45] Uh Uh so, first of all, you know, if we want to get to human-level AI, we we first have to figure out what does that really mean? I don't like the phrase AGI famously because I don't think human intelligence is general at all. So, calling human-level AI AGI, I think is nonsense. Uh But but clearly what we want to make progress towards systems that that have intelligent, you know, human-like intelligence, right? Or if not if not better in some domains, we already have that to some extent. Uh So, um intelligence is not a collection of of skills. Uh it's certainly not a collection of uh declarative knowledge. Uh which is what LLMs are good at. LLMs basically store declarative knowledge. They do a little bit of reasoning. Uh they can do a bit more reasoning in domains where the language itself is the substrate for reasoning, which means code, mathematics, and perhaps law.

[145:47] But that's about it. Um uh maybe logic um if you train on on synthetic data. Uh but um you know, but but ultimately you cannot measure intelligence by just the accumulation of knowledge. Uh and so what do you measure it by? You can measure it by the uh speed at which the agent can learn uh new tasks. Or can accomplish new task, okay? So, humans are capable of accomplishing new task zero shot without actually being trained. We face new situations all the time uh in our daily lives and we handle it without having to be trained for it. Of course, we if we practice the task multiple times, we get better at it. But um but most of the tasks that we do every every day, we accomplish them for the first time. And or at least we accomplish them in the first time in the situation that

[146:47] they are uh presented to us. And this is what makes us intelligent. And then new tasks that are more complicated like we're learning to drive or something like this, we need a few hours of training. But the point is we only need a few hours of training. How is it that a teenager can learn to drive in about 20 hours of practice? Whereas we have literally millions of hours of training data of cars being driven by humans. And when we use this data to train a neural net to clone the behavior of a human, it does not actually drive at the same level of reliability as a human. The reason being that the data set does not have complete coverage of all the corner cases. And there is a very long tail of complex cases. And so what makes a teenager different? The teenager has a world model. Right? The teenager knows that if you are driving next to a cliff and you turn the wheel to the right, the car will run off the cliff and it's not a good outcome, right? Your your world model can predict this. And

[147:48] so, you don't have to try. You you know that uh beforehand. And that's what allows uh humans to to learn new task in a very short amount of time using their mental model of uh of reality. Uh and it's not a single level uh you know, it's not a model a single level of a structure. We have models at at multiple levels of a structure and and and levels of detail. Uh that's what allows us to be to be smart. So, we're not going to measure intelligence. First of all, we're going to have to invent our own benchmarks. And I I showed some of them. And the benchmarks we use are basically planning tasks. Um and uh sometimes out of uh distribution, so different from the ones that you train the system on. Uh we're going to have to invent our our benchmarks, but um but also we're not going to be able to measure intelligence with a fixed set of benchmarks. What we're going to have to measure is the ability of an intelligent system to handle a new situation it's not been trained on and

[148:50] to measure how fast it can learn to solve it essentially. &gt;&gt; Okay, so for &gt;&gt; Well, I have &gt;&gt; Uh okay, so &gt;&gt; I have already told you that, you know, uh if I had add one more point in first of all, I agree with everything Yang said about super intelligence or AGI being a very very you know, a hollow empty word and the actual you know, challenge you know, in the details. Um I want to add that, you know, there is a one point you know, in developing agent or agency which is that uh current architectures isn't offering the ability to do self-regulation and deliberation in terms of uh you know, what to plan and with what approach to plan and with what data to to to to to learn and to do inference. In a sense uh even with the war model, you know, uh when you invoke the war model to do reasoning, you know, or you just uh use your muscle memory, you know, to do a

[149:51] reactive response by itself is also a question of current systems. So, I I I think uh war model is going to be a important uh element to open up, you know, a new uh avenue, you know, for training powerful agents, but it's still not going to be adequate, you know, to solve, you know, all the scenarios that we need. Uh just as Yance mentioned, you know, if you have additional data in text, in other modality, you know, you need to use it. Therefore, you know, the engineering design of the architecture in terms of a compatibility and applicability in of all these different functions actually becomes also very essential. So, it's more than just a conceptual idea of putting, you know, a different data modality, you know, or different architecture together. It's also about the real, you know, interface and also, you know, generalizability of the system, you know, that has to be now part of the equation. And that part and I have to say that um the academic community is uh at a disadvantage

[150:52] because of a very limited resource and also limited ability to coverage a wider scope. You need to have a big team, you know, that covers every dimension, you know, in a system to understand the knowledge. In that sense, I I I am very jealous about the Yance uh you know, set up, you know, that you are you were in such an environment and you are building a new environment of this caliber. Um I think this is also important, you know, for collaborative research in in AI that one single professor, single team is very difficult, you know, to uh you know, address all these issues that we raised.