[00:02:29] I won't take more advice. Yes. Workshop submission. So 13 and then yesterday. It really is.
[00:03:29] as a business school trying to do something doesn't look like the live stream is actually live. >> Yeah, we need to check. So >> you connected to Edone right now? >> Yeah, I guess.
[00:04:17] All right. Uh good morning everyone. Thank you for joining us to on the second day of the world models uh workshop at Chicago Booth. Um so this morning we are fortunate enough to have D de Yang uh from Stanford computer science with us. Uh she's going to tell us how we can uh have AI that works better with human beings and collaborates better. Um so with that I will let her take it away. Thank you. Du. Okay. Uh so I'm D. I'm uh I work on
[00:04:51] natural language processing. Recently uh my connection to business school is I have been very excited about the future of work and how we can actually build agents towards that. Today I'm not going to talk about any of them. Uh I'm going to focus on proactive user models. Um okay. I think the uh status we have today is that we have very powerful AI models. Um if you think about a lot of the possibilities we can do with AI and uh the burden of viewing them right now
[00:05:26] sits entirely on user. You need to know how to prompt. You need to know which model to use. You need to know what kind of hardness to write. Only by doing that you can actually leverage the power of LMS. And I want to share you uh some examples. Um my argument is that despite we have very powerful models um even for power users if you look at how we interact uh this is actually a post from Andre and uh he's talking about that in
[00:06:01] order to really get AI to work he actually has to spend like 10 minutes to really like voice out what's in his mind and then really bring that context to AI and similarly if you look at how people use it it's really not only about the capability right now. It's about really kind of um putting AI diffused um to general users. Um I think this is the drawback of today's AI that is they are waiting to be asked rather than like proactively help you. Um I want to start
[00:06:35] with a very earlier example that we have. Uh this is around 2025 when operator which is a computer use agent was introduced. A user was trying to use this agent to buy groceries on Instacart. They said that uh help me buy uh groceries on Instacart. The user was expecting the model to ask some basic questions such as where do I live? What store do I usually buy grocery from? What kind of groceries do I want? The model didn't ask the user any of that. Instant operator open Insta card in the browser and begin searching for milk in
[00:07:10] grocery stores located in Awa. So here this is really not about the capability missing. It's actually about this kind of clarification working with users mixed initiative going on. Um this kind of like coordination this kind of like collaboration is not only when it comes to a single agent. In this particular example, we were getting a group of agents to work together and the two coding agent needs to resolve conflicts in a code. So basically their addits happened in the same uh piece of
[00:07:45] code and then they need to finish the task. We saw that compared to um single agent solo agent which is the blue dots here uh when two agents are working on the same task they didn't increase the task performance. instant the performance actually dropped. This is what we call a curse of coordination. That is despect the coding agent on its own can do a lot when they work together. Uh it's really hard for them to resolve conflicts and then plan the settings etc. So this actually got me to my um main
[00:08:20] argument today that is this uh contrast between reactive AI versus proactive AI. So reactive AI is talking about we wait for an explicit instruction. Basically the user needs to specify everything any time and the model basically has a very limited model of you despite that there are searching or like browsing histories. Uh still it's a very reactive fashion. Proactive AI means that they are going to anticipate uh what you need and then act before you ask. So in this
[00:08:54] way this kind of systems is going to bring in some unspoken unstated goals context or preference and uh it's going to produce a consistent evolving model of you. Um this is actually something that I'm very excited about this days uh that is how can we actually have this kind of proactive modeling of users and I want to mention that this is actually not something very new um if you look at uh the history uh around like 70s um there is this theory called a good regulator
[00:09:28] talking about that a good regulator must contain a model of itself if we really want to make it work. Um later uh general user model was actually first introduced here. It was actually the first uh user model trying to think about how we can build a model of users to predict their actions, predict their states and preference. uh around the 1980s uh this gums and the KRM uh move from HCI talking about how can we predict actions that people do
[00:10:01] and also predict how long does it take to accomplish a task. Um later I think we see more and more of modeling actually moving towards modeling users inferring goals and predict the next actions. Um from a interface perspective people are thinking about how to build agents that can watch, learn and anticipate. Um around the 19 uh 98 uh this is when uh mixed initiative systems were introduced. So Eric Hovves proposed this
[00:10:35] Bian user modeling and I think the feature got shipped on Microsoft is called Kipi. So it basically like sits on your desktop and try to observe what you are doing and offer suggestion. I think a clip was a very ahead of time vision. It didn't work out as expected because technology foundation at that time is very thin. I think right now we are in this stage where you can actually do a lot of things with AI and uh basically the reasoning over users over raw behaviors finally work with the help
[00:11:11] of LMS and this is what I'm going to mention today around the general user model and next action prediction. Um I want to kind of argue that a user model is actually a world model of a person. So in order to really have a good understanding of users we actually need to think about different dimensions going on and this actually can be uh broke into several components. We need to think about the perceiving here. Um observing the user interactions, everyday computer use a lot of rich
[00:11:44] content that we can have and also around modeling uh inferring latent structures, preference, knowledge, goal, habits, a lot of those and also more importantly predict proactively anticipate what the users would do next, what they need next, what they are not going to do next etc. So this whole process is actually what I call a user model. So uh briefly I want to share about uh several things. First I want to show you another evidence of this kind of what we
[00:12:17] call a grounding gap in LMS. Uh second I'm going to mention this general user model. How we actually really create proactive uh models here and then on top of that how we can build a proactive systems. Um so the first part is about the grounding gap. This is actually a little bit more on the linguistic side. Um so basically if you think about the language communication it's actually not only just like a user like me speaking right now. It's also about uh recipient how people perceive the message. So um
[00:12:53] for each kind of like contribution let's say a a topic uh you have the presentation is mainly from the user the speaker perspective. There is also the acceptance from the recipient perspective. So if you look at this conversation here, a user was like who evaluates the property as someone says whoever you ask which is actually not very clear and then uh you can ask again like I I mean who decides what the price and then this user actually repair um or like continue reply with whatever people
[00:13:25] would play or pay. So if you look at the conversations there are like clarifications there are repair um so this is actually the rich dynamics of human uh communication so to kind of boil them down into like a very plain language I think uh we ask clarification questions this is a very simple lens I'm going to use and then if you look at those kind of dialogue acts like clarification they actually help us build common ground so let's just look at earlier last year. How would the LMS
[00:13:59] actually achieve the common ground between users? Um, we basically look at a set of grounding acts such as clarification, follow-up questions, acknowledgement. So, those are the discourse acts that the users would do to make their conversations more interactive. Um, the process is going to be very simple. I'm going to just run a quick experiment here. Uh, you can just take any human human conversations. it's this kind of like turnbased and then you can just like trunk one particular uh time step and just remove that response and
[00:14:35] then we can just let AI to generate that next term. Um you can then compare what has been produced here. Uh you can just look at how human would respond and how AI would respond in terms of this discourse acts and then we can do a correlation here. What I can share with you is that something very interesting happened that is if you look at follow-ups acknowledgement clarification and compared them in terms of how AI respond how human respond there's a huge amount of follow-ups acknowledgement and
[00:15:08] clarification um used by humans in this kind of conversation and this is actually consistent if you just like look at a different human human conversations and this grounding gap still exist. Um overall we see that um this is actually very consistent with different models and the newer models actually do similar or worse here. Um I think like whenever come to this stage you can ask a lot of questions like did you prompt models to ask questions? How about this and that um
[00:15:43] the thing is that this kind of results are actually very consistent despite you try different settings etc. Um so then the question is like why such grounding gap exist? Do we have any intuition of why models still do not understand human conversation very well? Uh the hypothesis I have here is that instruction following training paradigms actually result in less grounding here. If you think about this kind of base to SFT to preference tuning. Um so how about we actually just like going into
[00:16:16] training dynamics and to see what's happening here. uh first let's just isolate the instruction tuning methods and data sets and then second uh I'm going to test the models uh for those different uh discourse acts across different checkpoints of each method so you can actually mirror what's happening here and also quantify what's happening here um very interestingly what we see is that if you observe the SFT stage there is no improvement or degradation in terms of grounding acts but then If you
[00:16:49] look at the preference tuning like this curve, uh yaxis is the correlation with human usage of discourse X and then the X-axis is the trending as we trim more and more. You can see that overall there is a decrease uh in terms of the correlation with human conversations and then we also observe similar trend across different models and data sets. So the that part only tells us that if you think about those models still they
[00:17:21] are not in a way to ask clarification questions like human. Um LMS also make bad and confident assumptions about users. Uh one of the related uh phenomena here is called a synacy. Um we were trying to really play around like why synchroy happens and can we figure out a way to really go deep into this process. Um we proposed this concept called a verbalized assumptions that is for this kind of like synopsy related situations we are going to get a
[00:17:55] models to output their assumptions about the situation. Um here if you look at a specific user query uh the model is actually going to assume that the user knows they may be in the wrong but seeks validation or reassurance. When we did this kind of analysis for a lot of the synopsis data sets seeking validation is the top assumption the models make towards all those situations. Um if you kind of like actually going a little bit deeper uh to do this more
[00:18:28] structured verbalized assumption um you can see that among many dimensions you can get a models to output the the confidence and also what assumptions they have at that point. um you can look at this process and basically models have very different uh assumptions about what's happening compared to when we did the same study asking humans to share the assumptions there. So all of this is really sharing some earlier evidence that uh right now models still do not
[00:19:01] have a very very good understanding of how human would talk in a more naturalistic way and also make assumptions. So in other words they have a very limited modeling of users. So in part two I want to uh briefly talk about this concept called a general user model. Um so if you think about user model and as I was showing the last 50 years evolution of proactive assistant I think this is really a longstanding vision
[00:19:34] that we have uh not only like today if you like go back to 10 or 15 years ago we were building recommendation systems and you are trying to recommend the music TV movies you're using the viewing history here this is actually a very limited way of thinking about user model. Um, so instead of viewing one single context here, how about we actually remove the assumption of context and really use everything anything as a context here. And this is
[00:20:07] what I call a general user model. So general user model uh I think to put it into other words think about you have a local private model that sits on your computer and it'll observe how you do different type of task and every 10 seconds make a inference about who you are why are you doing this what you are going to do next what kind of things might be beneficial for you etc. So gum here is a system that use multimodal models to build a general understanding
[00:20:40] of your context through observation. >> Yes. >> So are we wrapping away the fact that like if you have a local model that's running this step is going to have to go way up. Is this like a vision or is this something that >> this is something we are implementing? I think that's a good question. So not only in terms of compute if you even think about memory and your battery on your laptop with all this kind of constant observation things are going to
[00:21:12] be a little bit out of control. So this is why like for local model this kind of vision general user model you want to make them very small and run device. Oh also feel free to ask any questions. Yes. Uh so far the user model I'm talking about here is really about like build for your computers. So there is no this kind of egocentric view of the world.
[00:21:46] I'll show a few examples. So let's say I'm on this uh specific web page. I'm trying to look at like ice cream here. And then the model is going to make this kind of preposition. So it says that I enjoy eating ice cream and viewing ice cream recipes with a specific confidence here. So now like uh if I kind of uh just like continue my browsing on my laptop uh it knows that oh um maybe I'm planning to move to Seattle and I work in healthcare industry. I'm applying for this and that
[00:22:21] job. So as you use your computer the model is actually generating a lot a lot of propositions about you in the back end. So this is actually a specific visualization. I have been using the systems myself and the first step is that the models actually observe you. It takes a snapshot of those like unstructured multimodal interaction and then it it's going to generate those prepositions. uh those are confidence weighted inference and then you can imagine once we have a very good understanding of what's happening you
[00:22:54] can actually make proactive recommendations so in this particular example which I thought is a really kind of impressive demonstration um so I was actually working on my slides and I was not making a lot of progress on my slides and at that moment there is a slack message saying like d where's your talk slice and then the model knows that I was procrastinating on my slides because I was on like PowerPoint for like five minutes and then they know that I was a professor. I work with um my colleague on this project. I was very excited about this and then they suggested that
[00:23:28] instead of you making the slides I draft a message to your student Omar if you send it he will finish talk slides for you. This is actually very interesting if you reflect that. If you ask like AI today just saying like hey I'm working on my slides blah blah blah they will be like I'm happy to help you finish your slides and then generate some kind of cloud taste slides. Um but here they know that the way how I works is that I tend to get slides from students and then they know that I want to talk about this work. So they make this particular
[00:24:02] inference and also the reason is that for I no reason a model in the back end think that my favorite student is also Omar. This is how sense get connected. So let's just now look at what's going on in the back end. So the first version of our user model is actually a prompting based approach. Um so you observe what's happening on user's laptop and then observe and audit. uh we take privacy very carefully. So here everything has been audited through a contextual integrity framework. So
[00:24:36] anything sensitive will not be taken screenshot will not be used in the inference process and then you are going to propose this kind of propositions. You can retrieve merge and revise. So in the end you will get more and more kind of like evolving propositions about user. So this is actually a bank of knowledge towards user. So on top of this kind of general user model, you can actually build systems to really enable um the next step. Uh so this as I mentioned is going to be a
[00:25:10] proactive and private assistant uh on your laptop. So I want to kind of quickly reflect as I was using Kippy as one example. Uh Clippy was actually a vision that's very ahead of time. Um, and also if you notice if you know what's what I'm talking about here, you're probably not young anymore. This is like a old system. Ouch. Yes. So, uh, I asked this on my uh during my teaching and none of my students uh, undergrads know what's what this is about. Um, okay. So, if we
[00:25:45] go back to how clippy and similar systems deal with this kind of proactivity. So in the end you are actually just making two con uh two decisions whether to interrupt a user and whether like to skip. So you are basically building this kind of triggering or trade-off here and then if you think about the utility of interrupting the user. So theoretically we need to estimate a probability that is uh how how useful the suggestion is. This is our like uh pi here. And then you also have a parameter called B which
[00:26:19] is a benefits of completing a useful suggestion. And then you can look at oh what if the suggestion is not useful and then um the cost of false positive here. The not interrupting utility uh can be calculated in a similar way. So the conf uh confidence that the suggestion is useful and then you missed that helpful suggestion and then this is how we actually think about that. So in this way what you are doing every moment is actually doing a trade-off here like whether to trigger the model to prompt
[00:26:52] to intervene to suggest compared to others. So if this is always on then you are making a lot a lot of decisions at a strategical time point. So this is actually a very uh different type of work uh compared to what I did before. Um so we had a lot of push backs from IRB and also just like uh how this kind of research can be p uh pursued. So our first evaluation was actually evaluating on emails. So it's true that it can observe your uh screen use but it
[00:27:29] can also read emails. uh what we see is that the inference we have generated like those propositions we then gave it back to our like 18 users and in general it's pretty accurate like 88%. Um also if you look at the calibration curve here this in this kind of underconfident region this is actually what we want because if model are very confident very annoying it's probably not going to work out very well. So then it comes to this stage where we were really trying to evaluate this. So
[00:28:04] we put them together into a system and uh we only get uh permission to work with five people on this system. So uh five users actually install this uh software on their laptop. Um they were all very excited about suggestions uh you this large amount of contacts on their computer. um on a one to seven liker scale um many people think that the suggestions were perfect and over half of them are considered useful. So just to show you some of the uh
[00:28:38] propositions. So on the top you see this very bold and opinionated propositions model have towards users like P1 is struggling with fixing bugs in their research project. P3 prioritize communicating with your advisors over other people. Like this is actually something you can observe by looking at how you use your laptop. Uh the bottom example is actually one another of those bankers that are really uh highlight the the usefulness of the system. This is a student. He was doing this and he was thinking about internship. He needs to
[00:29:11] move to Seattle. Um and he was complaining with his friends on WeChat about what's happening. uh the model actually knew what their budget was, where they were moving, that the user was worried about this move. It actually worked backward from their moving date, plan a schedule and identify moving services and half of those conversations was not even in English. So this is again one of those moments that just to show you like even right now with a prompting based approach, you can
[00:29:43] actually achieve a lot here. Um as I mentioned so uh privacy is actually the elephant in the room here. Um one person told me that if I didn't know and trust you I would have never installed this. Uh in fact um we take care of privacy very seriously. Um I'm not going to echo on this part but I want to share this kind of privacy paradox that is uh whenever uh there are like benefits or convenience despect that the people mention that they uh
[00:30:18] care about privacy they actually give up on it not to imply for this situation but we start to observe a lot of this kind of privacy paradox happening here for us the goal right now is how to really make this on device and audit what's going uh and make it like a local. Um in this way users actually have full control of what they are benefiting. So this is about like general user model. Um and I want to actually push this further. So the first version is actually something you can imagine more
[00:30:52] from a prompting based perspective. So what if right now we can actually just like look at what's going on on your uh laptop and really kind of making predictions of what would a user do next. And this is a model we are building called the long nap non uh next action prediction. Uh the model is going to look at what's happening and then predict what would be the future. Uh so in this particular example uh the model actually recommends um what the user would do next.
[00:31:27] So let's just like go a little bit deeper into the space. Uh this is a very interesting task called next action prediction. Um and I think you probably see similar or similar operationalization in other task as well. So it basically operates over event sequences here. So you can have like different event like snow's alarm and one time two uh several times and then the model is going to predict the future events giving those recent contacts. So again very naturalistic prediction here.
[00:32:02] Um so if you look at what's really happening here uh this is actually quite a straightforward. So uh you are going to get some past context here and this is going to be constrained by a window size just like the context window size. It represents our recent event history and then uh you are going to have a VM policy that take those input and make predictions. The prediction here is going to be the next action set. Those are the predicted events. And then you can also specify the future context window here. This is actually how we
[00:32:36] actually uh perform training. Um so to train models like this you really need a lot a lot of data. Uh there was this um uh effort at Stanford called a screen nomics. Uh earlier days when they were trying to study how people use social media. Uh this project actually recorded 10,000 people for over a month in terms of their screen use data. So we leveraged this coppers um and in order to really use this kind of raw videos you need a way to label those
[00:33:10] interaction data at a scale. Uh so our NAPSAC basically look at what's happening and also the keyboard activities uh try to compress them and annotate them into this kind of like action description. So, in the end, we only used the 1,800 hours of screen use, and that involves 1.9 million screenshots and a lot of annotated actions. One thing I want you to pay attention to is that the action space here is huge because at the next moment, a user can literally do anything on their laptop.
[00:33:47] So the challenge here if you think about NAP is that um if we want to make this kind of like inference about what the user are going to do next uh new data should immediately inform the next action prediction. But if you're going to do like weight based or latent learning this is probably going to be very slow. Um but we know that context learning has been um pretty fast and effective. So the idea here is that what if we can train a policy to instead retrieve relevant past reasoning uh for
[00:34:20] a specific user and then use those as examples to do in context learning. So uh very briefly this is actually the high level architecture. uh you get a lot of the past contacts and then uh we pass them into our um LNAP here to do this kind of reasoning and then we predict what the future actions would look like. Similarly to next token prediction in NLP um as long as you wait for one second you know what this user actually did. So this is actually a
[00:34:55] sliding windowish fashion to obtain label data in a really kind of unsupervised way. Um to go a little bit deeper into the modeling here. Um so first when we get any kind of context we are going to do this kind of retrieval. Um we will retrieve relevant memories relevant uh prepositions and then on top of that we are going to do our reasoning. Um you can reason like why the user is doing this, what they might be doing next and then on top of those reasonings and the
[00:35:29] existing past context, you can actually make predictions. The reward here is actually very straightforward because as long as you just wait and watch what the user does next, you get this kind of like natural supervision for this kind of setup. Uh so this is actually the key idea of uh next action prediction. Um again because the the setting is very sensitive and we are exploring this kind of local private model. Um in the earlier days or actually earlier this
[00:36:04] year we were only allowed to use two open uh widths model here. Uh so we tried it with queen VI ve and the Gemini here. Uh so as you can see compared to just doing SFT few shot zero shot uh doing this kind of a long nap is actually bringing a huge uh boost in terms of the performance here. You might also be curious that these numbers does not look very high compared to how LMS perform on math and coding. Um going back to my earlier comment the next action on your laptop the space is
[00:36:38] actually infinity. it's really hard to get that specific actions correct. So, uh 37 is already a very reasonable uh inference. Um also if you kind of plot like the curve for different users here I'm plotting 20 users. So you can see that some people are very easy to predict other people are just not very easy like and then average this is what it look like. You can also use this kind of user model just to do um clustering things like that.
[00:37:12] Um this is a visualization of how the retrieval actually works like is it really working. Uh so if you look at like current time versus retrieve the time you can see that when models are making inference about you on April 11 they are actually using a lot of inference from what happened in the past. um people's behavior are difficult to predict. So I think like uh many user if you look at how they use their computers um if you are just like doing research
[00:37:45] as like reading papers going to hog DB sorry going to one DB and going to a lot of things it's like a very easy some people are just like like my student uh he's like a working on project and then he goes back to look at ask and then he go back to overleaf again and then he goes back to Twitter so there are a lot of like a diverse behaviors Yeah. So here it's really about user behaviors on this digital environment and it's a very open-ended setting.
[00:38:20] >> Okay. Yes. Um, so good question. So if you remember my gum gum uh gumball setup in a gumball setup when you want to integrate it into a usable system, this kind of proactive timing is something we modeled explicitly. That's how I was talking about interruption. uh utility versus not interrupting utility. So, NAP here
[00:38:55] is actually our effort to really make this a training based uh fashion. So, next action prediction is what we view as the general base model for this kind of user model and on top of this nap we are going to do more like reasoning module. So, you can view them as more like instruction tuning or the poster training stage. So the key idea right now is that how we actually move from a usable system to the underlying foundations so that we can actually push this further. So the key idea here is
[00:39:28] that how can we actually build a general base user model so that on top of that we can enable many many fast local inference. Yeah I actually have some examples here. So uh this is actually some of the reasoning we got. So you can see that uh um this user uh when you look at some of the reasoning about them, the user's
[00:40:02] action suggest a habitual and possibly patent behavior of completing surveys and managing their Yahoo mailbox. This could involve clicking next etc. So when you look at a really what's going on um on one side there are indeed biases or like reporting or like a data collection issues you uh get. This is also why like for our current batch of training that I don't have results yet. We are actually sampling very representative user groups. So hope that such user groups and together with this kind of general
[00:40:34] user model is going to cover many many specific instance. Um despite that there are this kind of like um use pattern biases things like that um what the model is learning is actually not this kind of surface actions. is reasoning over like different type of behaviors of how this user would perform. So I think to some extent it actually goes beyond a lot of those like surface content. This is our hope. I mean still like in development. So this is framed as a very useful
[00:41:11] assistant but it it feels very dangerous like my students get checked their phones get checked when they enter the United States somewhere right and and so and it's just scrolling through their social media if I can even if it's a local model if I pull this and say do you support Donald Trump right that that that seems like it's opening a whole new bag of words for surveillance like Is locality enough to protect privacy? >> Yes. So a really good question. I think
[00:41:47] like the example you gave has many layers of of constraints or many layers of interventions we can think about. So here uh this is really about how you could have something on your laptop local and private. I agree with you that hypothetically if sins get uh like uh in um attacked then this kind of thing may get very um dangerous. Um this is also why right now we are figuring out like what are some good ways to do more privacy preserving uh settings. Um a lot of like things to kind of navigate. Um
[00:42:23] also like in the process even in the very beginning um any sense sensitive is already filtered out. So true like for your overall opinions of your tendency and this kind of thing um may not be filtered out because that's just how the user is. But you not only get that from this kind of general user model today if you use any social simulation model like even the social simulation is not built in terms of your laptop content but build on something like your social media post you can still ask the model like hey suppose you are XY like what's
[00:42:58] your opinion towards this president. So this is actually a lot of if if the goal is really to do this kind of thing I think there are a lot of other systems we have today that already kind of empower that um but in for this general user model what stores is like general user behaviors anything sensitive like your name and many of those actually get a filtered out if you remember we do have this kind of like privacy um things in the beginning and also in the recording process anything you do not want to be included are also already like not even used in the beginning. So
[00:43:34] this is really thinking about how to help you with general usage and then proactively with assistance. I already
[00:44:10] have an example. >> Okay, great question. uh how would the next token prediction in language modeling enable us to do uh question answering or summarization. This is a similar kind of argument there. So uh the earlier kind of proactive assistant I presented is more about from a usable this is the end product of what it would
[00:44:43] look like but we also need the foundations to be very powerful. So next action prediction I mean this is not the best analogy but you can view them as next token prediction. So we are really building a general user model trend on top of like many of those kind of like general use uh computer use uh data. So in this way the model is very good at predicting next action. This is what we call a base model. On top of base model then you can actually move into more like instruction tuning or a poster tuning stage where for example one of
[00:45:17] the system we are building called AMA ask me anything. So instead of predicting what the user to do next, you can also query the model like what is the user interesting right now? What is the user not wanting to do? What is something long-term that the user is not aware of right now? So you can actually move into the next stage. So all those different stage of tuning produce a general user model and then when it comes to a specific user you can actually use in context examples together of quering this general user model to make a lot of the productivity
[00:45:50] happen. So this is actually about the more like the foundational uh architecture. Yeah. So I'm going to show you one thing that has some kind of um implications here. Um so we also work with a lot of like a psych uh psychiatrist and u like co cognitive scientist to really figure out a lot of this kind of user behaviors and u it's definitely a very interesting
[00:46:22] source of data but uh I want to argue that if you do it right this is going to give you a lot of leverage and I'm going to show you one system that actually goes a little bit deep to help users understand motivations of why they do certain kind of behavior. So this is actually more towards the proactive systems you can build. Um so if you want to build proactive systems yes um you need to understand like why basically like a motivations beyond the actions the timing what is the right time to chime in and also generate the
[00:46:57] interface just in time. So just quickly going through this. So uh to really understand why users are doing certain kind of actions from this unstructured interactions we built this system called the behavior laticy. So it basically observe many of the observations and then doing deeper and deeper induction reasoning over like why the user was trying to do this and then trying to derive what we call insights here. With this kind of insights, you can actually see very interesting patterns
[00:47:30] uh for each individual user. So um here um you can see that it can group this dispar observations. It can actually connecting observations in tension. It can join across time and settings to make this kind of long range reasoning about users. Um so overall I think uh uh this kind of uh understanding is actually quite accurate. uh when you put them into a system like DA here um think about like a personal agent on your laptop. We saw that compared to the gum that I
[00:48:03] mentioned doing this kind of like a deeper understanding of why users are interested in something motivations for their task actually helps generating better insights and also like executions. Um so if you put this really kind of like on your uh laptop this Coco system is actually one of those systems we are building. Um you can just use your laptop in whatever ways you you are doing and the model is going to observe what you do and then proactively give you suggestions. Uh sometimes they may decided that to stay quiet other times
[00:48:38] they may take the suggestions and continue working on that. So this is actually the process right now. We are bringing this kind of general user model into the process of how human work with agents. In this way such proactive assistants really help you to determine when to um delegate and when to chime in. Um I'm going to skip this part and then um basically a lot of those right now is happening on device. So we are trying to see how we can make this observer agent local and in a more accurate fashion and
[00:49:13] this kind of memory setup is also very accurate compared to a lot of the other memories that we have um in terms of like a right tool. So instead of only just like generating insights you can also imagine that the interface and then the tools applications that you see can be actually customized for you on the fly. Um I'm going to show you a quick demo and then uh we can conclude this talk. Um so think about if I have a really good understanding of the users we can
[00:49:45] actually really customize the interface. Um okay I think the sound is not working but like instead of uh thinking about like today if you really kind of ask a question with uh tryt um like how do I learn piano? This is the type of thing you get. But in from this kind of generative perspective, you can actually just get a piano panel generated on the fly. So you can actually tap instead of learning um reading stuff in this kind of equation based fashion. The model will generate interface so that you can
[00:50:18] actually learn back propagation in a animation to see how gradient move in the network. And when we were doing this kind of like a generative UI kind of powered by this general user model, we saw that people actually really prefer uh this kind of setup. To kind of quickly summarize uh this talk, I think I started with this kind of common grounding gaps in LMS where uh models actually do less grounding compared to human human conversations. And then we really kind of go deep into this very unconventional idea of general user
[00:50:53] model like learns you by observing what you are doing and then you can actually build a proactive systems. Um, with that I'm going to conclude my talk and thank you so much and happy to take more questions. take a screenshot.
[00:51:39] >> No. Um their screen and summarize that. So do you use uh do you do you uh define a different token rather than just a uh regular you know large language model as using the same token as a large language um model. >> Um so let's go here. Um so here if you want to draw analogy each token is actually each observation the observation does not uh have summary the observation is actually all this
[00:52:13] kind of like screenshots you take and then you may provide the annotations for the screenshots with some kind of rich text and then let's say if your context window is the last one minute it will involve many many kind of data representing the last one minute and those are actually the the context we are talking about here and then the prediction is going to be predicting let's see what you would do next in the next five seconds and those are like the actions you are going to do. So this is the parallel kind of analogy if you want to draw token to the actions here. uh
[00:52:48] the earlier kind of like summarizing the screenshots is more from a system perspective just to show you what would happen if you have a very very powerful model but the the underlying tuning is actually this page. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So um not only like in terms of that there's also a reasoning stage where the model is going to like retrieve relevant content and then once they get those content they actually uh this is what retrieved this is your current context and they're
[00:53:21] going to do reasoning to reason over that and then on top of those reasoning and your context you are making predictions for the next one question. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yes. Oh, okay. Yeah. So, um I think uh open claw and many of those those are first they are prompt based approach. So, it's literally just like use uh like a messenger uh interface to really uh
[00:53:56] leverage like codecs and others like cloud co-work to really like navigate on your laptop. So, they are more from application perspective. What we are doing here is to really provide a a training view of what's happening because this local user model needs to be very good model of the user and then you can imagine anything like codeex can actually query this local user model to make a codeex more powerful. Cloud can query this local user model to make your interaction with cloud more useful. So we are really providing a orthogonal
[00:54:29] kind of modeling of the users locally. Yeah. All right. Thank you very much. >> Next up, uh we have Diego from Northwestern who's going to be giving us a deep dive into time series modeling. Uh we'll get set up here in just a second. Thank you. And Good to meet you. Uh, did
[00:55:05] you get the Zoom link from this one? No. Which email?
[00:56:15] Which which email did you My name is Ego Clavian. faculty uh which
[00:58:58] means sorry full-time professor at Northwestern University uh not in the downtown campus the one in Emonston that's where engineering is so I'm in industrial engineering and management sciences uh I am also the director founding director of the master of science in machine learning and data science and the director of center for deep learning right so this work that I'm going to present today uh has been done uh by euang zoo Efang Zu is a PhD candidate in computer science. He's having summer
[00:59:31] internship so cannot be here. Uh and another collaborator is Han Leu from computer science at Northwestern. And we also have an external collaborator Zeang Wang from the University of Sydney. But uh again all not most but all of the work is attributed to Euang Zoo. He came up with everything with all the concepts etc. wrote the paper and even prepared these slides even though he has summer internship as I said uh and the paper has been accepted by or at at NURIPS last year. So it was presented where was
[01:00:07] it in San Diego right it was presented in uh San Diego. All right. So, uh we all know that LLM's hallucinate in text. All right. So, and I want to tell you just a brief story uh that didn't happen the first time to me. All right. So, that's from yesterday actually. All right. So, I was doing some coding in the morning. Uh and it just the what was I I was using Opus 48. Okay. So, it just was doing stupid things, right? So, Opus, right? So
[01:00:40] creating code that makes no sense. Uh the algorithms were just horrible on a few occasions and um I tried so in the past sort of I tried being nice. All right. So hey you made a mistake uh do okay and yesterday I kind of said okay let me try a different thing and I started you're an idiot uh code better here is the pseudo code this is what you should do etc. Okay. And I tried this like four or five times yesterday and I don't know whether it was better or not. Okay. So, uh, okay. So, my story from yesterday and I'm sure all of you
[01:01:16] experienced this story and the story from yesterday was not the first time. LMS actually do hallucinate a lot, right? So, and I think or uh not I think I know Jan is a speaker here uh and he believes that LLMs are not going to lead to AGI. Uh, I'm on his side. I don't think they will because I don't see how hallucinations can be uh how we can get rid of or how LMS can get rid of hallucinations. All right. So we all know and have experience LM hallucinating when it comes to text,
[01:01:49] right? So whether that's coding or just basic uh questions, right? So but do they hallucinate when it comes to time series forecasting? All right. So uh you're probably familiar that there are quite a few models now foundational models for time series that are based either directly from foundational text models or they have been uh or they are based on transformers with a few tweaks and train on gazillions of uh time series right so uh perhaps the most known is Kronos of you probably have
[01:02:24] heard about uh Kronos and there are a few others right so I'm going I use them in uh our experiments. All right. So the key part of this study is do time series uh foundational models do they hallucinate? Uh and if the answer is yes and I can tell you right away that the answer is yes. All right. Uh then how do you cope with that right and what I'm going to present today applies strictly to time series because uh we uh have studied time series. Can these methodologies
[01:02:58] uh be transferred over to text? Uh I don't know. All right. So I guess to be seen even though we are not working on that. Okay. Yeah. I'll uh next slide or you'll learn in the first five slides. What does it mean? All right. So this doesn't give you an answer yet. Right. But this is this is an uh an example. Right. So here we have time series right? So and then this is after 500 it's what you're trying to predict right so that's kind of quote
[01:03:31] inference right so and you see that the time series is actually has a pattern right so 0 1 0 one up and down right so regular not irregular but regular pattern all right so and you see red is forecasted all right so predictions right so forecasted and you see that it predicts always one uh which is completely wrong right or I shouldn't say completely which is pretty wrong let me just put it this way right and it's not that kind of you can say hey one never appears in quotes training data. No, because you see that it's uh equally one is equally frequent as zero. Right?
[01:04:07] So this is an info. That's that's not a definition. This is an example of hallucination. All right? And it's hallucination now because uh there's no evidence not evidence sorry there's no reason to hallucinate here. Right? So the pattern in the time series it's crystal clear. Every one of us humans would predict it correctly. Right? So if you cut off this time series here, you definitely predict 0 1 01. All right. So and the LLM here and this is time series uh foundational LLM.
[01:04:40] Is it Kronos? I don't know which one it is. Okay. So it's way off. All right. Um and uh the other example right so is actually quote a good example where the LLM does not hallucinate. All right. So there is a pattern nice pattern here time series and red again is forecasting and there's no hallucination there. All right so they do they can hallucinate okay I think uh most or I hope most of you would agree that this here is hallucination all right it's making up things
[01:05:13] >> so how is there any sort of notion of what you call prolification versus just the model being bad like Is a bad model just is what's the definition of hallucination? It seems like here is just >> Yeah, I'll tell you. Yeah, I have no formal not one four definitions. Okay, they're not really definitions. Okay, but concepts in identifying hallucinations, right? But here, look, uh I believe this is done based on Kronos. All right, so uh are we saying
[01:05:47] that Kronos is bad? Uh I wouldn't go that far. All right. So, Kronos is actually known as being state-of-the-art or one of the state-of-the-art time series forecasting models. All right. Uh, and calling it bad. Okay. Maybe that's uh subjective, right? So, but I wouldn't call Kronos bad. Right? Now, yes, it's not perfect that that's what the left example there shows, right? So, um, and it's the same question as okay, do you call say OPUS 41 bad because it hallucinates? Um, I
[01:06:22] don't think I would call it bad, right? It's not perfect, that's for sure. I'm sorry. >> I don't want make Amazon angry. Your model is not bad. Your model just listening. Is it just a dupism? >> Um, no. No. Well, but as I said, so it's the same as with you can make the same statement with OPU 48. Okay. for any any other LM model, right? So, you would not or at least sort of I would not call
[01:06:55] Opus 48 bad even though it hallucinates and it elucidates actually quite often. Okay, I'm not saying most of the times. Okay, it's not just all right. Okay, it's hard to quantify. All right, but it's definitely not just hallucinating one out of thousand times. Based on my experience, it hallucinates actually much more frequently. But still I wouldn't call ous 48 a bad model. It increases my productivity a lot. Right? So uh if if if my productivity is a measure uh opus 48 is not a bad model.
[01:07:32] All right. Um okay. So uh so the the questions or the gaps the questions that we are trying to address or the gaps that we identified uh out there are how can we identify hallucinations all right and this is based on zero shot all right so because uh maybe you can we didn't try this okay so maybe you can reduce hallucinations by fine-tuning uh a model uh so based on zero shot for forecasting all right so how do you identify
[01:08:05] hallucinations And then uh what happens? So if you look at activations and a lot of the presentation here is going to be about uh studying hidden states and activations. What happens in hallucinating versus non-h hallucinated samples? Uh and then uh is there a way to mitigate hallucination? Right? So will you will see a methodology that that uh the student came up with that actually mitigates hallucinations. Don't get it wrong. I'm not saying getting rid of it, right? So, about reducing
[01:08:39] hallucinations, right? Um uh yeah. And the idea Okay. So, the idea of mitigating hallucination, it's essentially based on uh identifying signal and noise, right? So, and uh then amplifying signal, right? So, reducing the role of the noise amplify signal. So that's the key idea on uh hallucination uh mitigation. All right. Um all right. So some simple concepts. All right. So
[01:09:13] this is not yet quite the formal definition of what is hallucination. Right. So uh we have so zero shot learning. Right. So we have here uh is there a laser pointer? Well, okay. You see my mouse? Yes, you do. Okay. Uh well it's not a mouse trackpad. All right. So uh this is context right. So if you think about LM so so your what's uh your prompt you can think about it as a prompt right? So and then you ask an LM Kronos. All right. So you ask it hey make predictions for the next q time
[01:09:47] steps. All right. So the predictions are quantities with heads and the input or the context are quantities without heads. All right. So we study hallucinations from the perspective of hidden states, right? So these are hidden states at layer L. All right. Uh so the models here are white box models and not or concepts are white box concepts. So you need to access uh two hidden layers, right? So they're not uh blackbox. Okay. So but
[01:10:20] other other than that they're agnostic to the underlying models. All right. So they do need access to hidden states but whether uh you have self attention or uh or any kind of other attentions or cross attention etc that's completely uh irrelevant or irrelevant sort of it applies to any one of those examples right so uh we assume that there is a a set of quote knowledges all right or knowledge types I shouldn't say quote knowledge types okay because and I'll give you four
[01:10:54] examples on I think it's on the uh slide. All right. And so based on each knowledge type then you can assess or so there's a function R here that based on each uh knowledge type you can assess whether that knowledge is present in your predictions or not right so R is binary here 01 right so that's going to become much clearer on the next uh slide okay uh where I'll I'm going to give you four examples of knowledge types all right so but you can expand this into
[01:11:26] whatever you can introduce okay So whatever other knowledges and uh this uh rewards are. All right. Uh yeah. And then uh a model hallucinates. All right. So based on a particular uh knowledge type if uh if it hallucinates on certain uh samples zero shot learning samples and uh predictions that it makes. Go ahead. So >> yeah, that's the same. Yeah, this has
[01:12:06] nothing to do with foundational models, LLMs or and next it also doesn't have anything to do with it. >> So is that >> uh it's a good question. uh so okay so all right so if you think about standard time series forecasting I don't think there's a use of hallucination there uh or they don't use right so >> statisticians statisticians when it comes to time series they I don't think they use the word hallucination right
[01:12:39] but this here and what's on the next slide is actually applicable to standard say arma you name it right uh mortals so it doesn't really have anything to do with uh with uh deep learning and well not deep learning but LLMs right so LLMs now our methodology our mitigation and identifying of hallucinations etc that heavily relies on LLMs because it's based on notion of hidden states and layers right all right but I yes okay so this slide here except for the introd introduction
[01:13:11] of H and next slide here have they have nothing to do with LLMs okay all right so what are some of the rules right so this slide here shows four of these rules here in K right so R1 through R4 right and you can label them whatever you want okay and you can introduce additional ones all right let me just uh go kind of a little bit more in detail in the first one and then the remaining three I'm just going to skim over because they follow the same concept all right so trend rule right so whether there's a trend in your time
[01:13:44] series all right and a model all right so the kind of an intuitive uh not definition of okay an intuitive metric for concernation would be if in the context which is quote your training data right so if in the context there's a particular trend and then your forecast does not exhibit that trend well that's hallucination right or I mean that's that's how okay that in my opinion sort of that makes sense to be called hallucination and that is this trend rule type one it identifies the
[01:14:20] cases where uh the trend in con in training data it's not the same as the trend in forecasting uh in forecasted uh data right so that's type one hallucination in uh time series right and uh so formally in training data we create windows right so sliding windows for every sliding window we calculate a single variant uh regression uh and get a slope out of that
[01:14:54] regression. So every time window gives you a slope which is here S CI. All right. So and then C hat is the slope. So again single variant regression and on forecasted numbers. All right. So C hat is just the slope on forecasted numbers. All right. And this essentially uh this metric here said sort of look at the smallest slope in your sliding time windows in training data compare that against your slope in the uh forecasted data and if they are
[01:15:30] uh far apart sort of that's hallucination. All right. So that's one definition. So then we have similar similar definition or in terms of sliding windows and okay in this case it's not slope. All right. So frequency right. So frequency of y values. All right. So that's this one here. But it it it it's using the same idea. So it's a sliding window uh on training data. So that's fj and fhat on forecasted data. And then we have the uh relative absolute error. So again
[01:16:02] sliding window wj versus forecasted which is x hat. And then uh arma 111. All right. So uh assuming that your prediction depends on previous value and the previous error. Uh so ARMA 111 ARMA sorry not ARMA ARMA 11 gives you two uh coefficients. So one in front of next predictions the other one in front of uh not next previous prediction and previous error uh and uh if they deviate a lot again you declare that as being uh hallucination.
[01:16:37] All right. So these are okay. So any questions? These are now our formal definitions of hallucinations together with well no this actually doesn't matter that well okay so four rules here you can clearly introduce additional ones I don't know seasonality or uh I don't know maybe R square our matrix is actually R square okay so you can maybe even introduce R square here whatever right I mean whatever the our methodology that's to follow it's not directly hinging on uh on type of rules These are
[01:17:21] and a time series foundation are there. So how alternative how do you know it's the model not So we uh we conducted experiments on many time series data sets and three uh foundational models and we use all
[01:17:55] four of them uh for each in each one of the settings. So we don't calibrate. It's not that we select a a subset of these four based on time series. So the time series is actually we treat as quote black box or no knowledge about underlying time series. Does that answer your question? >> Uh I don't know. Uh but okay what I learned and this was but I was reading a
[01:18:30] book on neuroscience and what I did learn in that book is that hallucination is actually an illness. uh which I didn't know >> based on the training data. >> Well, so there Okay. So uh while when we
[01:19:10] got into hallucinations all right so um I learned that and and if you think about it sort of yes it all makes sense okay there's a concept of lying and hallucinations right so and that applies not just to humans also to LLMs right so an LLM is lying for example if the if in training data the if the training data includes uh okay I don't know Washington DC is the capital of the US and then you ask the LLM what's the capital of the US and it answers Paris well that's lying right so bluntly right I mean I think or
[01:19:45] I hope that all of us would agree that that's a lie right but hallucination is something that is not that it's made up but it's not directly inferred from the data there are facts that are inferred from the data but they are inferred in a wrong way setting ourselves up. I appreciate
[01:20:46] uh okay look or I mean so look okay so um we can replace here the word hallucination with sort of whatever other word you want to okay so the concept the concept here is something that you not you that the model some that model infers from training data and it infers it infers it in a wrong way and that's the same when we say that uh an LLM on text okay hallucinates right so it infers from the data but the
[01:21:22] inference process is flawed right so whether you call that hallucination or not okay that it's just terminology glitchy. Okay. Yeah. Correct. Yes. Okay. So now which one of you can here
[01:21:57] in my in my presentation can replace hallucination with name your favorite word that kind of capture the concept right and I just said the concept is uh a model is inferring from training data uh something that is wrong right or wrongly inferred uh sure I mean that's all I can say Look, all I can say is that when it comes to LMS, when it comes to LMS, I don't think or
[01:22:31] I'm actually quite sure they don't call it glitching. They call itation. And what was your what was the other one? Glitching or or artifacts. Okay. Artifacts. >> Yeah. Yeah. No, I understand. I understand. Um, so the bottom line is in LM they're calledations. All right. So, um, okay. So, uh, what happens inside the model,
[01:23:05] right? So, um, then I'll have to start moving faster here. Okay. So, what this shows is this is UMAP which is kind of the same as Tney. All right. It's not Tney. Okay. But in case you're not familiar with UMAP, think about it as T. All right. So we plot here for hallucinated hallucinated and non-h hallucinated sample. So each dot is one sample. Um we plot two dimensional representation of hidden states in the last layer. All right. So one important thing to observe
[01:23:39] here and this is the key message of the slide here is so red is hallucinated, blue is non-h hallucinated. Right? So and again time serious not text LLMs right so what you see here is that blue it's much more dispersed than red right so meaning hallucinated uh hidden states they tend to collapse all right so they're much more bunched together right so and that's a key observation empirical this is completely an empirical observation key observation that leads to subsequent uh concepts and
[01:24:14] uh and algorithms all right So again from this figure here I hope we all agree that red is more clustered more tightly bundled together than blue. All right. So in other words, hallucinated hidden states at the last layer of hallucinated uh samples which means time series here predictions. All right. So they tend to quote bunch together. All right. Uh okay. So this says okay. So I'm going to
[01:24:48] breeze through some of the slides just convey the main me. All right. So this uh tightness, right? So clustering uh is more pronounced in higher layers. All right. So lower layers they don't exhibit that uh higher lay layers they they exhibit more more and more of this homogeneous uh property of hallucin hallucinated uh examples. Right? So that's shown here. All right. So the key concept here is the kind of standard concept in or
[01:25:23] applying to LLM standard concept in time series forecasting which is signal and noise. All right. So we look at uh hidden states so HL at layer L and we decompose in signal and noise. All right. So this here is just block diagonal decomposition. All right. So this uh signal here uh symbol here right. So SL the uh higher the top what it top left top left block and NL the down right block. All right. So on the
[01:25:58] diagonal. All right. Uh and the idea is uh if we can somehow identify signal and noise then it's kind of uh the idea is then let's get rid of the noise and propagate only the signal. All right. So propagation now means in layers. Right? So because here we're talking about deep neural networks. So it goes layer one layer two etc. All right. So when it goes when it means activ uh yeah the signal right so when neuron signal goes
[01:26:33] from one layer to next layer depress and emphasize signal right so that's the key idea of our mitigation approach all right so now the key component is how do we identify SL and ML right so that's all uh we are using or I am using just to buzzwords or signal and noise. Uh but how do you go about or how do we go about identifying them? All right. So uh the key concept here is essentially
[01:27:05] variance right or standard deviation. All right. So we have activation is here or hidden states not hidden states. Okay. So hidden state. Okay. So we have a neuron at layer L has neuron J and X is just a a context. Right. So given context, right? So we have again layer L neuron J and we simply calculate the variance of that neuron J with respect to all other neurons to the same layer. Right? So this is the average. This here is the average and this is the value and square that just uh standard deviation. I I actually said variance
[01:27:40] but I meant standard deviation. All right. So A captures uh standard deviations of neuron values at layer L. All right. of N. Okay, it captures standard deviation of neuron J at layer L. All right, so and this now turns out to be uh crucial. All right, so uh when um so when when this quantity here with the variance is stable uh it means that that there's homogene
[01:28:16] homogenity, right? So which means that it's uh based on the previous empirical observation it means that it's more likely to hallucinate. All right. So again let's connect the dots here right. So when the standard deviation here variance standard deviation when the standard deviation here it's low it means that the hidden values are stable which means homogeneity right. So and based on this observation here empirical observation homogeneity implies
[01:28:49] hallucination it doesn't imply okay homogeneity is related to hallucinations go ahead >> no so L is a layer here yes so L is layer I'm sorry what R >> you know the you know you have equals to R um and R D's power >> R where's R
[01:29:24] >> yeah you know yeah this one belongs to the R D >> yeah D is a dimension of the ambient space right >> yes D is the dimension of the embedding space >> and then the L looks like also the dimension of the uh you know those points but those points are just the uh two-dimensional thing. I'm just wondering how you get the L >> L is a layer >> is a layer. How do you generate different layer? You know the two dimension in a point you only have X or Y dimension. How do you get a different
[01:29:57] layers? I >> uh so so this is in context of an LM which means it's a deep neural network uh that has multiple layers. So there's layer 1, layer two, layer three and every layer has its own quote embeddings, right? So which are actually here hidden states and those are dimension D. So they are in RD. >> Yeah. Okay. I I I I think that you know you know the dimension doesn't uh you know uh you know you know it's it's not like you know you know the dimension doesn't
[01:30:31] equal you know. So yeah. Okay. Uh now don't confuse this with this plot here because this is a this is a 2D projection. >> Okay. >> Right. So this plot here, this plot here, the left one, right? Your left. Yes. That's a 2D projection of HL. >> Okay. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. >> All right. So HL is in RD and here we are plotting a 2D projection. >> Yeah. Of that. Okay. Thank you. >> You're welcome.
[01:31:04] But there any other questions? Okay. So here is here is the key idea behind signal and noise. All right. So how to identify them. All right. So signal is simply the standard deviation that I presented on the previous slide. All right. So it it as I just said sort of it's correlated with hallucination. All right. But what about noise? All right. So well noise is kind of uh interesting. The student came up with an interesting well not concept
[01:31:37] okay but uh it's kind of the kiss principle right so keep it simple stupid all right noise is simply take input data and inject gausian noise on input samples and then get your hls all right so and that's going to be declared as noise right so think about it or or in other words so noise here is literally interpreted as or handled as 100% noise. All right. So we have you know okay so signal is standard deviation with
[01:32:11] respect to true data and noise think about it is really standard deviation from noise. All right. So purely injecting noise. All right. So for those of you that are familiar with diffusion models or in diffusion models you start with uh pure or you end up sorry you end up in pure noise. All right. So here it's similar, right? So we just assume pure noise to capture noise. All right.
[01:32:44] Okay. Any questions? All right. So again signal is really standard deviation from data and noise is standard deviation. Same model, right? So same model, same LLM, right? So uh noise is standard deviation from starting purely from gausian noise time series. All right. So we have two concepts. So the first one is the first one is trying
[01:33:16] to capture hallucinations. All right. uh and that essentially is we have this contrastive here, right? So which is signal minus noise, right? And and from the last layer, right? So because I said there was there was a plot earlier that says uh hallucinations indicators are higher at higher levels. All right? Uh layers at higher layers. All right? So we focus here just on the
[01:33:49] last layer which is capital uh L uh layer. All right. And we find a neuron. So Jar which is a neuron with highest uh contrastive value. All right. So highest value where signal it's kind of similar to noise. All right. And that is now this highest neuron then becomes a measure to capture hallucination. Right? So this is a completely scientific right. So so these four here were let me call it statistics
[01:34:23] statistical ways toident oops to identify uh hallucinations. Right? So here it's a I shouldn't call it scientific actually. uh this is a uh this is a a way to identify hopefully to identify hallucinations uh based on the inner workings of LLMs right so because you have to know the values of hidden states here all right all right so how to okay so the most interesting and in my opinion the most uh significant impact of this work is
[01:35:00] how do you cope with hallucination how do you reduce hallucination. All right. And what we do is so we identify signal and noise. All right. And then we amplify this is this part here. We amplify the signal values uh of neurons. All right. So we have our original. Okay. So it's a four-step process. Okay. I'm kind of jumping ahead a little bit. All right. So first of all when you do uh say okay when you do manipulations with numbers or data you
[01:35:33] should normalize your data right because you want to have just one single scale in this case uh it's h you want to have average of zero all right so first we mean normalize the data this is the step here right then on this mean min mean normalized uh matrix and there's a typo so this should be the first value here should be uh should be h head. All right. So here there's a not tilda sorry not head tilda. All right. So we normalize uh centralized uh or center not centralized sorry
[01:36:07] center the hidden values. Right? So then we split the resulting centered hidden values into signal and noise. Right? So based on this principle of here principle of standard deviations of neurons. All right. So we split them into signal and noise and then the signal component. This is which is this one here. This is just pro projection. All right. So this is uh the hidden state. These are hidden state values. And then this is simply
[01:36:40] the projection operator. All right. So and then lambda greater than one uh it means we multiply the signal. This is a signal component. We multiply it by lambda minus one which means we amplify it. All right. So we amplify the signal component of hidden values. All right. So uh and then we desent desenter I'm not sure whether that's a term or so we restore the mean. All right. So this is the last operation is
[01:37:14] the reverse of the first operation. All right. But the the key part is the second step here. Right. So the again the second step here says take the signal component this is here right. So the signal dimension of the space or coordinates of the space and amplify it by multiplying with lambda minus one lambda is strictly greater than one. All right so then add to the entire uh hidden uh vector. All right. So you can represent this more in or in a matrix
[01:37:47] format in this way here. It's at the bottom right. So PT uh PT is the projection uh or not P P is the projection uh matrix. All right. So let me iterate let me not iterate let me repeat again. All right. This here is projection to signal multiply with a matrix. And then the key part is this this gives you uh the hidden the signal. This gives you signal of the uh hidden vector and then multiply it with lambda minus one and then add back to HL. All
[01:38:22] right. So everything that's outside of signal has zero. Right? So this addition here addition here means well it's standard addition. That's about what it does is add nothing to the noise component and add lambda minus one times uh the signal component to the signal components dimensions of the vector. All right. Is there any questions here? Uh, no, this has nothing to do with FFTs
[01:39:06] with FER. Uh, this is all inside an LLM, right? So, inside a large language model. So an L here is a layer. Um and we do this we apply this at every single layer. Now whether look all right so whether because there there are deep learning models uh tailored for time series that have uh FFT components. All right now uh this is okay Kronos or uh what's the uh time TM I think we use.
[01:39:42] All right. uh whether they have uh fast FFT components I don't know I don't think Kronos has it has them uh maybe it does okay but it doesn't matter okay so whether I mean or it's the study here the work here is irrelevant whether your LLM has uh frequency components or not FFT right so fast for frequency components or not all right any other questions All right. Uh skipping uh
[01:40:21] skipping. All right. So again, all right. So what is this this slide? What is about is uh so we don't use a fixed lambda. We have a strategy to dynamically uh algorithmically compute lambda and adjust lambda. All right. So here you have the formula. I'm not going to go into details in the formula. Go ahead. Yeah. Okay. Um, all right. So, experimental design. All right. So, we use uh many uh
[01:40:54] standard time series data sets. Uh, I think around six of them. Uh, so if you look at or those of you that are familiar time series literature, uh there's like 20 uh time series data sets. We picked six six or so uh hardest time series publicly available data sets and uh so this slide is about uh our uh R square. All right. So here you have this is uh without our mitigation. Okay. So just uh give you the performance which here it's
[01:41:28] R square. All right. So these are three time series foundational LM based models. All right. So the performance the difference in R square of hallucinated versus non-h hallucinated samples. All right. And how do we define here hallucinated versus non-h hallucinated? No, we do not examine them manually. We use those four rules. All right. So if one of the four rules uh implies hallucination, then it falls in red bucket. And if none of the four rules kick in for a given
[01:42:03] time series sample then it falls in green bucket. Right? You see here and this is expected. Right? This is not anything. It's not surprising at all. Right? So non-h hallucinated examples they yield uh higher R square. Right? So the Y-axis here is uh R square. Yeah. The uh it's R square. All right. They yield higher R square versus hallucinated examples. All right. So hallucination clearly does not help with prediction accuracy. Right? And that's yeah not saying anything deep here.
[01:42:36] Right. All right. So, any questions about this slide? And we do P tests and so everything that you see here or everything that I'm uttering here uh it's uh statistically significant. No questions. All right. Um All right. So, these are now type one, type two, right? So, where where do where does hallucination uh h um uh happen? All right. So and orange is type three. All right. So type
[01:43:09] three is the ARMA 11 one uh principle. All right. Or hallucination detection rule. Right. So blue here uh purple and blue uh are one and two. So uh purple is trending. Blue is what was the second one? Uh frequency. I think it was yeah frequency. Right. So this was frequency. All right. So uh they trigger hallucination but far less frequently than ARMA 111 coefficients. All right. So now um
[01:43:48] yeah. All right. So this is kind of okay. They uh across uh so the average on on the various data sets and all uh and the three models. All right. So you see that uh yes I mean orange is based on the previous slide also. Okay. So orange which is type three uh shows hallucinations uh most frequently but all of all three kick in. All right. So all three are needed uh in order to detect hallucinations. Um all right. So what do okay yes so
[01:44:22] this is now applying our our new methodology. Right. So which is this one over here. All right. So applying this enhancement here. All right. So when you go through layers emphasize uh signal. All right. How does that how much does that uh the slide here? Right. So how much does that improve uh for exampleation rate? All right. Yeah. It doesn't shake the boat. Uh or yeah it doesn't shake the boat. Okay. But it does improve. All right. So green is our methodology which means emphasize
[01:44:57] signal right so algorithmically and what is this gray all right so gray color is vanilla kronos out of the box right so you see that hallucination rates of our methodology are better again I'm not claiming we shake the boat right so they are better right and this is now correlations all right so which is or you could as well plot here R square or mean square error whatever you So correlation is in Pearson correlation. All right. So predictions uh ground truth measure pear correlation. All right. So the higher uh the better
[01:45:32] value. All right. So and you see here likewise that we are doing better but uh not that much. All right. Well against Kronos actually we do quite a lot better. Okay. Against the other two not that much. All right. Let me skip this because I'm at the end. So here are just some examples. All right. So of hallucination versus non-h hallucination. This is kind of similar to the my introductory uh slide just to give you kind of a little bit more uh sense. All right. So this is hallucinations, right? So red is predicted. Yes, red is predicted. Green
[01:46:06] is target. Uh yeah, and you see here for example hallucination it's kind of all over the board, right? So it's not trying to uh follow green which is ground truth. All right. But in the non-h hallucinated examples. All right. So you see that the match is much better right? So this is expected right? So this here it's expected behavior. I'm just showing you further uh further examples. All right. Um what else? Right. So clearly we could test it on more time series more
[01:46:39] foundational uh models. Uh and then an interesting aspect would be black box. Right. So because we are white box because we need access to hidden states right so completely blackbox that's still an open problem right so hallucinations in time serious in a completely blackbox uh model and then yeah okay so if some of you are statistitians or probably most of you uh causality right so uh is something rel or how related this is to causality or maybe even implied by uh causality or
[01:47:15] impact ffected by uh causality. All right. Um so takeaways hallucinations in time series does happen. Uh one way to cope with it is to uh split hidden states into signal and noise and then amplify signal and that reduces uh helications. All right. So it's a it's a methodology to cope with hallucinations in time series. All right. So that's it. Thank you very much for your attention. Appreciate it. You're fine.
[01:48:49] That was nothing. SD But the content
[01:49:27] >> uh right so I've done some other work which is unpublished which is evaluate or comparing foundational LM based models versus traditional statistical models and uh I came to the same similar conclusion as what you mentioned earlier which is uh yeah the standard statistical models often outperform LM and deep learning models >> data that's text. >> Yeah, it's standard textbook data sets. Yes. Yes. Okay. Uh
[01:50:02] uh so that's correct. Standard sort of data sets. Okay. Public data sets. Okay. Now, okay. Why I jiggled when you went into your second part of your uh discussion is because uh a year ago I was involved in a consulting project where a big uh Fortune 500 for sure yeah Fortune they're not in Dow okay for Fortune 500 company um was interested and still is interested in using financial LLM models for their forecasting.
[01:50:35] Uh are they really doing some sophisticated traditional statistical modeling modeling? No. All right. So why I'm saying this is they are just following buzzwords. All right. So uh they want to or they're interested or well okay they want to apply for national models for time series forecasting uh kind of pretty much for the sake of doing it. All right and
[01:51:22] Yeah. Uh, we could do that, right? But now, all right. So, wearing my academic hat, uh, what's going to be the benefit for the student? Nothing. None. Or I don't see it, right? Because, okay, so we have a paper here. Uh yeah, we would have an open-source uh financial model. Uh how much would that help the student towards uh graduating? Not that much to be honest, right?
[01:51:56] Because it would not be a second chapter. So I'm his adviser or so I would uh I'm thinking now would I approve that kind of a second chapter. Okay. Or unclear. let's say unclear whether I would so okay so the benefits to the students are unclear >> from such an effort >> I think you have to be >> uh I think uh the code is probably open
[01:52:29] sour uh not probably I'm quite sure that the code is open source what the student did right uh Yes, that's correct. I >> Yeah. >> Yeah. >> So, we're running a little tight on time. I'm going to take the the hot take that mechanistic interpretability is is
[01:53:02] very easy and straightforward to do today. Um, no, no, no laughs. Okay. Um, but no, we we can continue uh this discussion uh during the break. I want to make sure people have a chance to use the restroom. So, uh we'll come back in about 11 minutes uh at 11:00 a.m. and we'll have uh an a talk on learning uh representations of financial assets and investors. >> Thank you. All right, I think we're missing a few
[02:04:23] people. Um, but let's just try to stay on schedule. Um, so next up we have uh Ralph Kijen. He's a professor here at Chicago Booth. Uh, he's also affiliated with CPR and NBER. Um Ralph has been a pioneer of various different ways of of looking at markets um that are perhaps uh controversial but are proving impactful. Uh and so today we're going to see some of his more recent work and things that he's been thinking about that I'm I'm sure will continue to to change the way we look at the world. So
[02:04:55] that Ralph take it away. >> Okay. Thank you so much. Um thank you for the opportunity to present some of our our research. Um um uh it's it's joint work with uh with uh three people in particular, Zavi Gabbeck, Rob Richmond and Moto Yogo. Um so I'll I'll try to give a bit of an overview talk and um I must admit uh seeing lots of robots yesterday uh I was worried about the disconnect uh with what we're doing. So I thought I'll take the opportunity to give you a bit of background in terms of like where we are coming from, why we're doing what we're doing. Um, and
[02:05:28] then I think sort of like seeing the presentations this morning, there's much more of a connection uh to those. And so, uh, I'm going to sort of like end with a couple of questions that I have for for all of you in terms of like how we can do the things that we're doing probably a lot better. Um, so let me just start with like like some of the motivating questions. So uh a lot of the the questions that we are interested in uh in if it comes to financial markets uh evolve sort of like involve some some actions by some participants. So that could be like investors that could be uh firms that
[02:06:02] could be uh policy makers like central banks or or fiscal authority. Um but ultimately they have an impact on the quantities and we want to know what is the impact on prices. So for instance uh there's been this like like trend over the last couple of decades where investors have moved from or or asset managers have moved from uh active actively managed portfolios to more passive management index funds and there's lots of questions about what it does to the functioning of of markets. Uh there's like certain trends related to certain types of strategies like environmental strategy and maybe the
[02:06:35] slowdown of of those in in current environment. Um there's questions related to like global capital flows and what it does to financial markets. Uh and then of course like all the policy decisions that you hear about in terms of like quantitative easing, quantitative tightening where central banks buy vast amounts of assets. Uh recently currency market interventions uh setting risk weights for banks, insurance companies and so on. What all of those those do is they shift sort of like uh the demand for some assets and we want to know what is the impact on on prices or kind of like I know maybe closer to what you're following um if
[02:07:10] you have a very highly levered like hedge fund that quickly needs to like unwind a set of trades on AI stocks uh then we learn that that can move prices. So, what you really need if you want to sort of give credible answers to these kinds of questions um is is a so-called asset demand system. And so, I want to sort of like take a minute to sort of walk you through that because that's going to be pretty central to what uh what our research is is all about. So, um what is an asset demand system? Think about it like the way financial markets work is that you have investors that are
[02:07:42] choosing choosing portfolios of financial assets. Um then you have like firms and governments that are supplying those assets. So they issue equities, they issue bonds. Uh and those need to be held by by someone. And then like where prices in financial markets come from is that that markets need to clear. So supply and demand need to like equate one another. And that ultimately gives you a model of of asset prices. Now it's not just that we're interested in in in in sort of like policy questions. What you can do with demand systems is that
[02:08:14] it allows you to understand like why prices move. So for instance, you see over here like a famous like ETF from ARC and and we sort of see these like violent swings in prices and we don't quite understand why. So you see that the price triples by a factor of three and then comes down to the same level as where it was and we don't quite understand like where that comes from. Now what what demand systems allow you to do is to trace back movements in prices to sort of like individual investors and their choices and and actions. Now you can also start then thinking about how you can use that not
[02:08:48] to just explain current prices but also to predict future returns. And so some of our work we think about how you can predict future returns by predicting future demand. Okay. And so so if you start thinking about about modeling the asset demand system, uh there's really two very sort of like central questions like one is uh is how do you represent assets and how do you represent firms? Um and second how do you represent investors? So so which assets are alike which firms are alike and the reason that matters is that if I see that a
[02:09:20] certain stock let's say GameStop becomes much more expensive and I sell it like what asset do I buy do buy instead? If I see that the central bank is buying certain assets like how do I substitute to other other assets? Similarly, if I'm interested in questions about like like big swings in prices that's driven by similar investors that have a similar taste for certain types of of assets, I need to sort of somehow figure out what are uh what are similar investors. Now, that sort of like was our entry point in learning representations of like firms
[02:09:52] and assets and probably why I'm here. Um but more broadly if you think about what economics is trying to do in a lot of different areas um um getting sort of like representations of firms is actually very important. So for instance if you think about industrial organization where we try to understand like how firms compete with one another in the product market you have to figure out which products are similar to each other or if you think about labor economics people sort of like trying to find jobs it's important to figure out like which companies compete for the same same talent. So in all of these cases you're trying to figure out how do
[02:10:25] you represent a firm and so the traditional approach to how how we do this in economics or in finance is that we use observed characteristics. And so for instance if you think about representing a firm you choose like a particular industry and you have a whole bunch of like characteristics that may come from like accounting data, asset pricing data and so on. So you may say that this is a technology firm that's like largest fast growing etc. And that's your that's your representation. Now if you think about sort of like representing sort of like um uh investors
[02:10:58] then then we typically sort of like go by institutional type like you're like a hedge fund you're a mutual fund or or an insurance company. Uh you may use information on the size of the fund how active they are how much they trade etc. Uh but the number of characteristics there is actually fairly fairly limited. Now I think it's sort of like long recognized that these like representations are too uh too simplistic and and and incomplete. So for instance like the standardized accounting data is going to miss sort of important nuances across across different firms and that is particularly salient when the economic environment is
[02:11:32] is changing. So for instance when the pandemic started uh you saw there was a lot of like papers that that were written in a very short period of time trying to figure out like well which firms have a lot of like um sort of like face to face interactions when they deal with their customers uh which companies can easily allow their employees to work from home etc. Um you see the same happening now with AI where we try to understand like which firms are exposed to AI in terms of like the risk of being displaced or or particularly enabled by AI uh or the rise of intangibles. And so
[02:12:07] in all of these cases like sort of like figuring out like like how to represent these firms turns out to be pretty challenging. Now if it comes to like investor sure sorry yes so in a lot of cases you can make make significant progress uh on uh on building um building those representations. So for instance, we've
[02:12:39] seen that if it came to let's say COVID 19 or or or now the exposure to AI, people come up with like very creative sort of like ways of trying to measure those those exposures. Now the challenge though is that if we start thinking about what drives financial markets, then there's a laundry list of potential sort of like features that may matter that we may not sort of like have a very easy way of learning about. And so it's going to be a question about like we can on the one hand sort of keep sort of prespecifying characteristics. The alternative approach that we're going to explore is can we somehow learn
[02:13:12] those like representations that matter for asset prices. Okay. Uh thank you. Now if it comes to like investor characteristics uh we actually have much less to choose from and and if you try to explain like for instance what people like how investors choose their portfolios with observed characteristics uh you get very sort of low R squared. So you don't explain much of that much of that variation. And so like our starting point was that if you want to sort of have a realistic asset demand system, you need to understand how investors choose their portfolios and
[02:13:44] can we somehow learn those those assets uh representations of assets and and investors. Okay. Now one one um point that I want to make is that there's something special about financial markets. Now I'm sure that every researcher feels that their field is special um but I think we we are really special. Um and it's sort of for two reasons. Um one is that the topics that drive financial markets, they're constantly changing. Okay. And so so if you just go back over the last whatever 15 20 years, we had the global
[02:14:19] financial crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis, we had the pandemic followed by a period of like high inflation. Then there's the AI boom like geopolitical uncertainty and and sort of like part of the economy of course functions in the same stable way but part of it is is kind of like refreshing. The second part and that's going to be kind of like um unique to to to the data we're studying is that asset prices are like an equilibrium outcome and and I'm kind of very curious in in in you're all thinking about sort of world models and having actions and states like where the notion of
[02:14:52] equilibrium comes in there or how you think about sort of like how people respond to equilibrium outcomes. And so in our case, whenever there are sort of like trading opportunities, investors will try to take try to take advantage of that and that's going to lead to inherent instabilities in in the equilibrium that we that we observe. Now both of these forces combined imply that you tend to live in a fairly small data environment at least in the time series. So unless you start moving to like really high frequencies, there's only so many sort of like time series data that you have that you can that you can work with. And so given that the question is
[02:15:26] like okay how do you start learning learning representations and I I should say that there's like like like some interesting work going on using using using text data and I'll revisit some of that some of that later but um our starting point here was that the sort of like the structure of financial markets is is going to be revealed through like investors decisions. So what we want to do is to learn representations of firms and investors from from holdings data. And so this morning we talked about like uh predicting sort of next actions and
[02:15:59] things like that. Uh effectively think of portfolios as the actions of of investors. And so a portfolio is going to provide information or re reveal some information about an investor's like beliefs whatever constraints that they face uh and what their preferences are. Now, if you put them together for a given firm across across investors, then you're going to learn sort of like like which which assets are considered to be similar or substitutable um and which characteristics that investors actually actually value. Okay. And so the simple idea that we're going to explore is that
[02:16:34] that kind of in the same way as you can use sentences to learn representations of words. Um we're going to think of portfolios as being able to learn representations of of assets and and and investors. Okay. Now, um I'm going to show you like a a tiny bit of like theory just to give you um give you a hint of like the the main result, but there's some nice result that suggests that if you want to learn representations of assets and investors, then then there's certainly good reasons to use all kinds of data, but holdings data really should be part of your data
[02:17:09] set. And and the reason is that um I'm going to show you that under empirically relevant conditions all the information that matters for asset prices should be embedded in in holdings data. But then depending on how investors choose portfolios um the methods you want to use to sort of extract that information is going to be is going to be different. Okay. So just to give you a sense of like what are what am I talking about withholding? So um what we're effectively going to have is for like thousands of investors and if you go to
[02:17:41] like household level data we're going to have like hundreds of thousands of portfolios and what you see on a regular basis is their holdings of of different of different securities. So this is for um the situational awareness fund the latest filing where you see that let's say 28% over here is in like Sundisk and so on and so forth. And so effectively what we're going to learn about is the information in these portfolios and why investors put those uh put those stocks together in in portfolios and how it matters for valuations. So then the question is like like which
[02:18:15] methods uh can we use uh to learn embeddings and we're going to start like very simple um where um a a fairly sort of standard empirical model that people tend to use in finance uh is going to give rise to like like linear recommener systems being optimal as a way of learning representation. So that's kind of like our our starting point. Um but then we're going to sort of like like go beyond that and see if you sort of like start generalizing the model a little bit. So first using a similar structure to like word tovec or transformer models
[02:18:50] um whether those could be helpful in our context as well. And then and we're sort of like going to stay very close to the standard way of training these models um compared to what people have done for for language models. And we're going to find that perhaps surprisingly that those architectures but now applied to like holdings data as opposed to text data uh are actually a very uh seem to do quite well in learning in learning representations. Okay. Now what can you do with that? Um you get a question. Okay. Sorry. Um so so what can you do with that? So um
[02:19:23] we're going to sort of like present it in terms of in terms of benchmarks but um think of these as like applications once you have good representations of uh of firms. So one is you can think about like relative like valuations. So you can think about sort of like what are the kinds of characteristics that investors value and how does how are stocks valued relative to one another. Um we can use them for capturing common movements and returns across firms. So you can you can use them for risk management. Um but then also you can you can think about it as predicting like
[02:19:57] what investors uh will hold in their portfolios as well either contemporaneously or in the or in the future. Now I'm going to show you an application also to like fixed income markets. So for most of the talk I'll I'll I'll focus on equity markets. Uh but we're going to run the exact same architecture for credit markets as well. And credit markets are kind of like uh important because um the the the the regulatory framework there it's all about sort of like rating agencies and we know that ratings for fixed income instruments are kind of like slow to
[02:20:29] adjust and so the question is can you do can you do better and so we're going to show that you can use these um these embeddings u to better capture the credit risk uh of different firms and then it allows you to reassess the solveny position for like a large uh uh regulated set of institutions which are insurance companies uh which are actually the largest investors in in corporate bonds. Okay. So that's sort of the some some applications of of asset embeddings. Now for investor embeddings um um the applications are sort of like twofold
[02:21:04] the natural applications. So one is that um on a very sort of like regular basis we learn that lots of investors are loading up on similar kinds of trades. So we've seen this with like the situational awareness fund. Um but it's sort of like happens on a on a kind of an ongoing ongoing basis. Um and so really what you're trying to figure out like which investors are similarly positioned or trading on the same views, same beliefs, same information and can it lead to instability in financial markets? And so in the first talk today, we we we learned about sort of like next
[02:21:38] action prediction. Here you have a massive data set of investors essentially choosing their next stock they want to like buy or sell or adjust their positions to. Um and we can we can sort of like if you have a model that can predict that that's going to be extremely helpful to identify uh which trades are potentially crowded and you can use it for predicting returns. Um a second application is in measuring the performance of uh of actively managed portfolios. So there's a large sort of like um interest both in academia and in the industry is to
[02:22:11] figure out like which asset managers have skill and which ones do not. In order to identify who is skilled you need to sort of build up a good like reference group. Okay. So how does this particular fund do relative to its to its peers? And so normally again we use sort of like fairly limited sort of like characteristics to figure out like who are the peer funds by like I don't know size or or or things like that in terms of the underlying companies. Um and so now you can find a much better peer group as I'll show you to compare particular managers to okay and so if we can learn better representations of
[02:22:43] assets and investors uh there's numerous applications of those of those tools. Okay. So um what do I want to do? Um so I first sort of like show you um uh just uh in in a couple of slides um sort of the main sort of like intuition behind this idea that that if you want to learn representations of assets or investors then all the information that you want is essentially in the holdings data. Okay. Then the question becomes like well what is the most efficient way of learning that information? So we're
[02:23:16] going to sort of like look at at various methods that are all going to be very familiar with you to you other than we apply them to different to different data. So I'll spend a little bit of time on explaining the data uh how we compare them and then show you show you some results. Um also then uh once we've learned those embeddings it's kind of useful to figure out like what are you actually picking up and um and how to interpret those. Um I'll talk a little bit about sort of like an application to credit markets that we're um currently working on and show you some results of
[02:23:47] that. Uh and then uh at the end given the nature of the conference uh I have a lot of questions for you on how you would think about sort of like building world models for financial markets once you start thinking along these these lines. Okay. So let me just try to give you the general logic in in in in two slides. So the way we think about sort of like modeling financial markets kind of in in pretty general terms is that you have an investor I that's going to choose a portfolio. So like the data I showed you before. Um so you're going to choose a
[02:24:20] portfolio of assets. Uh and that portfolio of assets going to depend on on two two things. One is a vector of prices. So some stocks are expensive, some stocks are cheap. Um and then then there's like a big uh matrix X potentially that that contains all the characteristics of of all the assets. Okay. So the first one over there is just your your demand for different assets as being investor I. And then where do asset prices come from? Um you're going to you're going to add up the total demand across all the investors. That's the sum um the sum
[02:24:55] across the QI. Uh and that has to be equal to supply. So that's been what's been issued by firms or in case of government bond markets what's been issued by governments. Now then like where do prices come from is you balance those two and so what it implies is that prices are going to be a function of those of those features X. Now what you can do and that's sort of like a simple trick that we use uh here is that you can substitute those prices back in um into the demand and you get what we're going to refer to as the
[02:25:28] reduced form demand system. The reduced form demand system is just plainly your holdings and those holdings are going to reflect all the characteristics over here that matter for pricing. Okay, so that simple logic which applies to pretty much any any asset pricing uh theory or any theory of financial markets. It's going to tell you that if you want to start learning representations of financial assets um then holdings data contain all the information that's relevant for for prices. Okay. Okay. So that's sort of the key that's
[02:26:02] sort of the key starting point for us as to why we care about why we care about holdings. Now to make it maybe a bit more concrete, let me give you like a simple example in in a linear case. And that linear case is going to give you uh a specific methodology to extract uh representations which is a which is a standard recommener system. And so what we do over here is we're going to instead of having a very general okay instead of having a very general like model of demand over here we're going to specialize it like a lot and
[02:26:35] I'll tell you sort of like what the micro foundation for that is uh and that's sort of the one that's being typically used in in in a lot of empirical finance research. So what you have over here is the log dollar holdings of investor I for stock A. Uh there's some size component because some funds are larger than others over here. Um then there's this part over here and this is something that is extremely important in finance but it's not something that I've heard anyone talk about at least in the way we think about causality. Uh but I would love to get your thoughts on where this term goes in
[02:27:08] a lot of your applications. So, so what this is is that is that if prices get more expensive, okay, there's going to be an equilibrium response to that and how aggressively sort of like investors respond to more expensive prices all else equal, okay, is going to be controlled by the zeta I which is your demand elasticity. Okay. And then there is this new IIA which is your demand shifter. So that tells you like how much more appealing is a particular asset fixing fixing the price. Okay. Now, for what I'm going to talk about over here,
[02:27:42] I'm going to get rid of this term by substituting out the price. But if you're interested in using these kinds of like methodologies for stress testing or any of the questions that I mentioned on the first slide, um this equilibrium response is actually very important. So if you think about sort of like simulating the impact of your actions on future prices or your actions on current prices, knowing how like other investors respond to prices that are higher or lower is actually very important. Okay. So we're going to impose a little
[02:28:14] bit of structure here where um um uh the demand shifter is going to have this bilinear structure where the lambda I over here it's going to tell me like how much a given investor cares about certain features and the x over here is the the representation of those of those firms or or assets. Now like where does that come from? Uh it turns out that if you um assume that investors like higher expected returns and dislike variance which uh is a common assumption if returns follow like a factor model which
[02:28:48] is strongly supported in the data and if you make the additional which is potentially strong assumption um but at expected returns and the loadings of an asset on those factors if those are aphine in those characteristics it turns out that that this model of demand is going to exactly give you this this structure. Okay. And so these assumptions are quite commonly made in in the empirical like research for for finance. Uh but they're potentially very strong assumptions. Okay. But at least
[02:29:21] sort of there's like some way of backing this up. Now if you then sort of like impose market clearing like we had there in the middle of the slide. If you impose market clearing you get that the prices that we observe um depend on the characteristics the representation of that of that asset or firm um and also the lambda s over here. Now what is this what is the subscript s? The subscript s is the size weighted average across all the investors in the market. And so
[02:29:53] we're going to put more weight on those investors that hold a larger fraction of of the asset. Now how much they move prices depends on the inverse of the inverse of the elicity uh that we can forget about for uh today's talk. Now if you then substitute those prices back in. So take that top equation and put it back in this equation over here you get a structure that's very easy to uh to estimate. So you get that the log dollar holdings of investor I stock A it's going to have like two fixed effects and then this bilinear
[02:30:25] structure. Okay. So that's sort of like um it gives you a very simple micro foundation for for the first method that we're going to use to estimate to estimate embeddings. Okay. Okay. So u so that's the first part over here. Now um so we estimated um using like like uh regularizations for the uh investor embeddings and for the for the firm embeddings over over here. The reason why that's important and you'll see um that we deal with this in various
[02:30:59] ways. The reason why that's important is because lots of investors hold relatively concentrated portfolios. So the median investor only holds like 50 or 60 stocks. And so that means that if you want to start estimating higher dimensional models then you quickly start overfitting things and so you need to somehow regularize regularize the asset and investor embeddings. Okay. And so uh there's a bunch of different ways of how we do this. U I won't sort of get into those into those details but that's um we'll we'll talk about those as we
[02:31:32] look at results. Okay. So the second uh model that we estimate is sort of like a very close cousin that you know uh from like word tovec. Um and so now we're going to estimate sort of like a very sort of like shallow model. Now the key thing over here is that which is different from text is that we want to estimate both asset embeddings and an investor embeddings. And so when we estimate representations of assets, the way you should think about it is that we're effectively organizing the stocks in an investor's portfolio and then we're
[02:32:06] masking a particular position for that investor and try to predict it from the other stocks that the investor is holding. Now, if you want to get a representation of of of investors, then we're going to try to predict we essentially like like you transpose your data matrix and instead of looking at the holdings for a given stock or for a given investor, you're going to look at the at the ownership shares for a given for a given firm and that's going to allow you to estimate investor embeddings. So, let me just show you this with with an example. So if you're going to estimate asset embeddings over
[02:32:40] here, so these are the holdings of of Bergkshire Hadway like um the the firm of um of Warren Buffett for like the longest time um until they recently stepped down. So what you do is you organize the holdings of uh of of Berkshire Hathaway. So the largest position is in Apple and so on and so forth. you mask uh these these positions and then you try to predict based on the other stocks that they hold what the missing what the missing positions are. Now if you want to estimate the invest Yes. Go ahead.
[02:33:19] Um so it's it's at this point so you're going to get to this this part over here. So what we're doing over here it's it's just the identity of the stock but the ranking is now very important and so the ranking over here is being done on like your largest position. Now the alternative that is very natural is to start thinking about it as the active position. So relative to let's say a benchmark that that you can construct. And so the slide that I skipped over is to essentially ask like where does the
[02:33:51] information sit and so you can think of information in holdings at three levels kind of like getting to your question. One is do I hold a stock or do I not hold a stock? The second is if you rank the positions what is my largest position what's my second largest position and so on. That's the information we're going to use. And then the third dimension is well my largest position is it like 8% or is it 6%. Now, we're going to find that it's really the first two parts that are the most valuable. And so, over here, we're effectively just using that that that
[02:34:24] amount of information, but there's nothing that stops you from also using the actual the actual amount. Um, okay, that's a great question. Okay, so that's sort of like for asset embedding. So, you take an investor's portfolio, you mask their positions, and you try to predict the missing. Yes. Wait, wait.
[02:34:57] I answered the first part. Just tell me the second part again. >> Yeah. >> Um well, so that depends on like how investors view them. So if investors view them as very substitutable then you will see that there's going to be some investors that have very similar portfolios where some hold let's say Pepsi and some some hold some hold the other one and so effectively we're going to learn which assets are going to be similar because they may and I'll show
[02:35:30] you an example later where both of them may be in the same sector they may be similarly sized but there may be something else that is unique about them some part of the embedding vector is going to differentiate between between those Okay. And so um once we get to the transformer models, you'll see that the contrast of learning is going to play a role there. Yeah. Um yes. >> Yeah. How do you um
[02:36:11] working in the same thing? How will you put them together? >> Yeah, >> they all have small piece of piece of but maybe not as much represent but still there. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah, it's a great question. So um so there's three data sets like throughout sort of like our research that we've worked with. Um so the the high the most aggregated one is the so-called 13F filing. So every institution that's larger than 100 million files those um 13F filings. Um the problem with those is that all of
[02:36:45] Vanguard is one filing. All of BlackRock is one filing. And so you miss the granularity of the individual funds. And so what we're going to do here is we're going to go down to the individual funds. So we're going to look at the ETFs, the mutual funds and so on and so forth. One big benefit of that is that if you if you want to learn about industries, there's like a lot of literature in finance and how you like learn about like which firms are in the same industry and people use tax data now and so on. Well, we have lots of sector funds. So we can learn from the sector funds which stocks naturally belong to a certain to certain industry. Then the third like like like level of
[02:37:21] granularity you can go to is household level data sets. And I'll show you some of that as well because um in some of our research we use data from a company called Autopar uh where we have like hundreds of thousands of household level portfolios and there you have indeed like direct holdings and you have fund holdings and so then you have two two choices effectively either you're going to sort of like aggregate the individual stock positions into like into a fund or you apply sort of like a look through and say like um you take the individual holdings of the ETF and the mutual your
[02:37:53] fund and you essentially unbundle them. Okay. And so those are your two your two choices. Okay. Um okay. So um so this is asset embedding. So you take a given investor, you mask some of their positions, you learn a representation of assets. You can flip it around and you can say like now let's take a company, let's take let's say Nvidia in this case and says like well who owns them? And now you get sort of like ownership shares. And if you then mask like certain investors, you're going to learn investor representation. So investors are similar if they end up holding similar
[02:38:27] portfolios. Okay. And so that's sort of like uh the key idea that you can sort of like you rotate your data matrix and you you learn of you learn different types. Okay. So then um we can also go to uh contextualized embeddings and so that's where the where where your question comes in and and and transformer model. So um obviously sort of like the same asset in different portfolios can be represented very differently. Okay. And so for instance if ARC invests in Tesla maybe because it's a technology firm. If if if the S&P 500 index fund holds Tesla
[02:39:01] it's because it's a large cap stock and it's included in the S&P 500. So those are different characteristics. And so depending on like who owns it uh you may get a different representation. So what we do over here is we're going to uh to train a burst style transformer model uh where we use sort of mass asset modeling for the investor embeddings and mass investor modeling uh for asset embeddings. Okay. Now it's a very sort of like a out ofthe-box sort of like architecture other than you need to modify the tokenizer because like to the earlier question um we're now sort of
[02:39:35] like using the stocks directly as um as as as as the tokens. So the training sort of like then proceeds in in two steps. So first step is that you just mask uh some of the investors if you train the asset embeddings. Um and then we sort of like like fine-tune the model using a sentence transformer using this contrastive learning where effectively what we do. So we take a portfolio we split it into two parts like so you take all the odd positions you take all the even positions and you try to match those together. Okay. And that's sort of the way we aggregate an entire
[02:40:08] portfolio. If you do that for if you do that for ownership shares um you get the other uh the other embeddings. Okay. And so so that's sort of the the protocol that we follow for training um asset embeddings and for training these investor embeddings. Okay. So then uh to the question about uh which data do we use and so um kind of like in response to your question we want to have the most granular data that we have. So we can learn about things like like like industry structure like the active bets individual funds stake
[02:40:40] etc. And so we're going to use data from like hedge funds uh mutual funds ETFs closed end funds and variable annuity funds. Um um then uh we're going to estimate this like cross-section by cross-section. So there's no time series information that we use here. We'll bring in some simple time series later. But a big question we have for all of you is if you think about world models like whether the time series dimension is even something we can do here. Um um and then uh for interpretability we use we use some text data as well. Now as I
[02:41:13] mentioned in the beginning so the standard way of like representing uh firms is using using uh accounting data and asset and asset pricing data. And so we're going to have like a data set with 150 of those characteristics as well. Um as a as a point of point of reference. Now when we started working on this like uh maybe 3 four years ago um um we knew very little about sort of how you train these models and so I reached out to sort of the AI labs and asked them like like whether you I know whether they saw
[02:41:45] any obstacles training this on holdings data. Um their response was there wasn't much of an obstacle except that they said we shouldn't be doing this at all. Uh because the embeddings that they trained already contain so much information to represent firms that we shouldn't even bother doing this uh because we would never be able to get close. Um and so in the same sort of like like spirit of like comparing these uh comparing these representations uh we're going to also look at the embeddings uh for firms that are present in cohhere and openai. Okay. So um in terms of data uh just to
[02:42:20] give you a sense so in a given period there's like something like like 1,600 firms. Um the average number in of investors is increasing quickly uh over time. um the average number of like holdings that you have in a given period now it's it's kind of like around a million. So that's your training data per per quarter. Now if you go to like household level data um like the autopar data that I mentioned before you'd be able to estimate much larger amount. The amount of data you have there is several orders of magnitudes larger. in certain countries like in in Finland and other
[02:42:53] places um you have literally like the entire population and so the amount of data you have there is is significantly larger than than the regulated funds that we that we have. Okay. Now here's sort of like a chart that um um is is kind of important to show like what what information different data sets contain. So the way to think about it is at top left um you see uh what happens if you extract like principal components from uh from holdings data. So that's the green line over here. The other lines that you see
[02:43:26] so the purple line at the bottom uh that's just if you randomly simulate embeddings. So that's just like as a reference point. Um the next two lines are text based embeddings. And so what this tells you is that the textbased embeddings they cannot explain holdings data particularly well even in higher dimensions. The same is true for these observed characteristics. So one way to put that is there's a lot of stuff driving investors portfolios that is not present in the textbased embeddings and that's not sort of like spanned by typical typical characteristics. Now the
[02:44:01] same over here with observed characteristics the holdings can't explain that either. So there's information in there that may not be particularly relevant for pricing and the same for same for text. Okay. So let me uh let me speed up a little bit. So what we do uh and I'll just show you um two in particular. Um we introduce like three benchmarks to evaluate those those representations. So um one is can these representations explain relative valuations. So if you know like how these like representations price a subset of assets, can you
[02:44:34] explain other assets out of sample their valuations? Uh we look at the co movement in returns. Uh and then also can you predict sort of like investors um holdings and potentially rebalancing. Okay. So um in terms of like relative like valuations what you see over here uh the blue bar is observed characteristics. Uh then we use the same number uh the same dimensionality of embeddings which are still very very small scale initially um uh learned from holdings data somewhat higher dimensional over here uh and you see
[02:45:07] that the holdings based embeddings perform much better than observed characteristics in explaining relative relative valuations. Now if you combine the two together the observed characteristics actually do not add very much. So the second green bar over here is with the observed characteristics added to the holdings based embeddings and that doesn't add all that all that much. Um let me skip the the text based embeddings um and show you on um on asset similarity. So now we're masking these positions and
[02:45:41] ask can you predict what stocks investors hold. Um over here uh using the observed characteristics you can explain around 20% of what what investors hold. These bars over here those are the recommener systems. Uh they perform about the same. Uh but you see that the wordtovec uh based model structure already perform significantly better. Um but the part that's very sort of like striking is that the um uh the transformer model here works like really really uh well and so if you start scaling that one up over here you
[02:46:13] explain about I know 15 20% of the variation here you explain about 60% of the variation. So in terms of like predicting actions of what investors are doing it seems these very basic architectures that have not been designed at all for holdings actually work quite quite well. Okay. Um and so uh just to make it concrete to also uh maybe visualize the question from before. So what it ends up doing is that that you mask a particular stock that let's say arc is holding in this case that third position is is then Tesla which the model in this particular
[02:46:47] case puts at the at the eighth eighth position. Okay. Now um just to make it sort of maybe more tangible um like what the model is is doing. So um what you see over here are the closest firms to um to Apple, the closest firms to Cityroup. Now similar firms are actually kind of hard to judge on its own because investors like we have sort of this intuition that firms um are similar if they're in the same industry and you see some of that happening with like Apple and like Alphabet, Nvidia and so on. So
[02:47:19] that sort of like aligns maybe with intuition. Um but if you think about like how investors form portfolios then coariances and things like that also matter and so those are much harder to to judge. Um if it comes to like similar investors it's actually much much cleaner. So for instance here's the DFA small cap value ETF. The 10 closest like funds those are all like small cap value funds. Now you may say like if you go to I don't know company Morning Star which you may know like this is what they do for a living and small cap value is kind of like relatively easy.
[02:47:53] Uh a less salient one is or less obvious one maybe is like let's say the AQR arbitrage fund. Uh you get 10 funds over here that we didn't really know but if you look them up then all of them are doing sort of um um special situations events for um for firms and so they're very similar in terms of their their strategy. Okay. Now, if you want to sort of like play around with this, we have a website called market genen.ai uh where we running this in in real time and so you can sort of like put in your
[02:48:25] favorite like fund. Um you can see what your fund is actually holding. You can see what are the similar funds. So this is for semiconductors over here. Some and you see all of these are like semiconductor ETFs. So that's good I guess. Um um you can see which stocks they agree and and disagree on. Um this is the AQR arbitrage fund now and again lots of funds that are doing sort of special situation stuff. What you can also do there is that it's linked to text. So if you want to say okay what are the 10 like like largest positions?
[02:48:57] What do those stocks have in common? It summarizes that based on lots of text data. Okay. Um then the other application just in the last whatever three four minutes I have um um that I briefly mentioned that I'll briefly mention to you is we apply that exact same sort of like logic but now to credit markets and the reason why credit markets are interesting is because like ratings play like a really important role uh if it comes to like mutual funds classification and benchmarking if it comes to sort of like uh the regulation
[02:49:30] of insurance companies and it's well known that ratings are very slow to adjust. Um, and so there's commercial products that let's say Moody's is providing um to try to help investors get more upto-date information on the credit quality of a firm. Now, what's kind of surprising is that if you if you fix a rating though and you look at sort of like how much heterogeneity yields there is, uh, there's actually a surprising amount. So you see that the standard deviation in yields fixing ratings and maturity um is is about sort of like I don't know 75 basis points to
[02:50:04] 1%. And so there's a lot of differences in yield still for the for the firms with the same maturity same same credit quality. And so we train an embedding model and we then ask um can this model explain explain yields. So just quickly what you see over here is this is explaining using ratings uh ratings and distance to default which is sort of similar to the commercial product that Moody's offers. Um and then embeddings over here and this is for different rating groups. So it's within a particular rating group and you see that embeddings help to explain those differences in in yields. It helps you
[02:50:39] to explain volatility in in credit spreads. Um, and what this table is telling you is that it also allows you to predict which firms are being downgraded from investment grade to to to junk bonds. Okay. Um, and so as an application of like what you can do with this is that we use it to um to rethink the rating system that's being applied uh to uh to the regulation of insurance companies where we do two things. one is that we have a more accurate way of predicting credit risk for companies, but then we maintain the transition
[02:51:14] matrix. So, it's not that like our ratings are like really really volatile, which would be an unfair comparison. And so, we have the same stability in ratings, but they're just more more accurate. And so, if you apply this to actual insurance companies, then they would have to change their equity position um on average by 16 percentage points uh in order to maintain the current ratings either up or or down. And so that's a non-trivial change for very highly levered institutions. Okay. So let me conclude and then like finish with my questions to you because
[02:51:46] I want to make sure uh I get those out. So um main takeaway is that if you want to learn about financial markets and representations of firms and investors is that at least from a theoretical perspective uh holdings data should be part of that equation. That doesn't mean that other data like structured data, text data and so on, expectations data is is not useful. Of course, of course it is. Um in particular if you think that we're living in a small data environment and so you that other information is still very useful, but at least uh at least uh the um the holdings data should be part of that of that
[02:52:21] conversation. Now if you then sort of can start using these models to predict future actions uh similar to what we saw this morning um then you can start thinking about using this for return predictability as we've done in some of our earlier work and for and for stress testing now then if you start thinking about what we're doing it seems very natural if you hear if I hear all the words yesterday about having noisy data our data is very noisy so that's satisfied we want to predict in latent space potentially as well the main question is is is sort of the
[02:52:54] following or the main two questions that I I I would love to hear thoughts on is first of all like the time series step um given that we have a very unstable environment sort of like how well can you learn that in particular at at lower frequencies and then um this point that I tried to make in in passing earlier on is that if you want to do counterfactuals if it's not enough to predict sort of like who's going to buy or sell because for every buyer there's there's as a seller. And so that means that you need to know like what are the elasticities and and and if some
[02:53:28] investor is forced to sell because they are constrained, how much do prices need to move, okay, for other investors to make way or to buy the stocks from that investor and and so this equilibrium considerations that is very central in lots of economics questions. uh I would love to know if there's sort of a Jeepa style equivalent to that and what the research is on that or maybe that's just like a phenomenon that's a problem for economists but doesn't really bother anyone else which is very possible. So thank you so much for your for your time.
[02:54:05] >> Yeah. Sorry, second. Yeah. So if it comes to like uh return based so so let's say you would extract them from the coariance matrix of returns. Um so there what we find is that if you um if you go to like smaller
[02:54:40] like lower dimensional embeddings from holdings uh they don't do as well on the co movement benchmark compared to like observed characteristics or using the coariance matrix directly but if you scale them up and you go to higher dimensions then you start to do better. Uh but there the high dimension is is actually kind of important and the way to think about it is that if you learn like embeddings from from holdings um it's not clear sort of like whether the first sort of like components you're extracting whether those tell you something about expected return about risk about downside risk or ESG any other consideration investors may have
[02:55:13] um and so so you need to have that extra that extra step. The other thing that you may be able to do is to sort of like fine-tune like you you sort of pre-train the model first like in the way we do and then you fine-tune it on that particular task and there's also um um the option to sort of like start from like the return based embeddings and then see whether the holdings data contain additional information. So like we took a very sort of like stark approach to focus just on holdings just to say that okay this is not data that we typically use and it seems such a
[02:55:46] natural starting point to learn representations but at the end of the day given that we have a small data environment and the environment is shifting all the time using the coariance matrix expectations data text data all of it combined seems the very natural step. Ah, you mean like if if if like one
[02:56:21] company owns owns another one. >> Yeah. So, so so we haven't sort of looked at that in particular. Now it's starts to become a very important issue. So maybe we we should sort of like look at that. Um so we have we haven't sort of looked at like if you have cross ownership of of of of stocks. Now, what is what is sort of like um maybe easier to do is to look at sort of like managed funds and see if you would have if you would if you would add let's say an ETF to the training data and say like look at the stocks that the ETF holds and
[02:56:55] what the representation of the ETF looks like what how how does it represent those and those you would expect to be very comparable because that's essentially how the how the sentence transformers is is training them. Yes. the embeddings for different transformers because embeddings of different words of being sever. So my question is just to understand how you went about
[02:57:30] >> um well so so show so wait again because like why do you say it's different >> by uh for different. >> So my question is how you went on to achieve that because that's different from >> ah no it's no no it's actually very similar. So so think of it as like um like like the way you normally have a contextualized embedding in in a transformer model in the same way if if I hold Apple in a portfolio with all like large cap stocks I'm going to get a different representation compared to
[02:58:03] when I hold Apple in a portfolio of all technology firms. So you may you may think that okay I think of Tesla as kind of a car company. I think of Tesla more as like an AI company. You pair it with car companies. I pair it with like other AI companies. And so then the the contextualized embeddings that come out of like our different portfolios are going to be different for the same for the same company. So it's really very sim it's very similar logic and and and so the transformer gives you something that economically seems to make a lot of sense. Okay. So that's that's why we went there. Thank you. Oh, sorry. Yeah. So the holdings data is is is
[02:58:50] quarterly and and but but but also like for persistent sort of higher frequency data is not going to help necessarily that much and so it's not clear like it's less clear like how much how high dimensional we can make the model and still have like an accurate sort of like forecasting step for the time series. Yeah. So, so and there's there's some research now which is trying to sort of like essentially first have a now
[02:59:22] casting step where you try to fill in the holdings data sort of in the middle uh and then use that maybe to train train the model. So maybe there's something you can do there. Okay. Thank you. >> Okay. Uh thank you very much Ralph. Appreciate it. Um now we're going to move into the lightning talks. So each uh uh you know paper presenter presenter excuse me uh will have five minutes to give their talk. So once you get going you know I'll I'll start the the timer um just to keep us on schedule.
[02:59:58] All right. Look good. Ready to go. >> Five minutes. >> Five minutes. Yeah. >> Going to start. >> Yeah. >> All right. So uh hi everyone my name is Aliosha and uh I'm a CTO of um stealth stage startup. I was until recently at in media and I'm actually here today on behalf of my former intern um Cindy. Um sorry just a second I'm just realizing I'm not seeing my uh uh
[03:00:34] ah okay okay now everything looks good now. Um where was I? Oh yeah. So here on behalf of uh um Cindy that couldn't make it here today and I'm going to talk about new ways of understanding memory in video world models. So um as a community we have been making a rapid progress in interactive video world models. Um so this this demo here comes from my former lab at uh at Nvidia and you know overall in all the demos and results people are showing things are looking really cool but one thing that
[03:01:07] they're usually not going to show you is what happens if you you know navigate around um in such a world and return to previously seen location right what is usually going to happen here or what I'm showing here is we start in a point A we move towards the point B and then we just move back right and what you're going to see here um is going to be framed that so this frame generate and return is going to look different than the starting point right and in general over long rollouts the model is going to drift and forgot what it it has seen uh earlier
[03:01:40] um so of course the reason that this happens is uh memory and there are actually two coupled failure modes at uh at work here and the first one is uh addressability right so um video world models commonly used and poorer open battings as position position encoding and then what's going to happen so then learning training key query key position offsets are going to be bounded by the training context right or by your GPU van if you if you wish right and at the inference time you're going to want to keep wandering around right which means that those offsets are going to keep keep growing right and this actually
[03:02:14] means that uh you may might may still have earlier frames in your KV cache but the model can't address them anymore because positional offsets are going to be out of distribution right and Second issue is um content fidelity. Right? So if you're try if you try to compress history by averaging group embedding it rotated then you know different phases are going to cancel each other and you're going to destroy the the vis visual information. Um and uh what we propose here is called world trace which is training free memory framework that's going to keep
[03:02:46] long-term memory both compressed and uh and addressable. And the way we do this is we divide the cache into fixed size summary cache. So this one stores more distance memory in compressed form and we have a recent window that just copies information from most most recent frames. And of course the main question here is going to be what we write in this summary slots, right? How do we do the the compression and we have here two different methods world trace field and world trace landmark. And I'm going to sketch them out in a second. Um before that want to mention here this key idea that um summary memories are not going
[03:03:21] to keep their original absolute positions right this wouldn't work they would go out of distribution so instead what we do here is we assign each memory slot fixed virtual position that is going to be stay relative to the current query so because of this it's always going to be within models training context right so this is a crucial point here and this means that regardless of how long the rollout becomes every memory stays positionally in distribution Um okay so with this we can then you memory compression structured sparse uh attention right so full attention would attend over the entire history over t
[03:03:55] frames let's say and this becomes increasingly more expensive then instead what you're going to do with world trace is we are going to project that history into small number of representative memory slots right so l um here and these are projection matrices for four different cache structures right so sliding window approach is what most method currently do, right? You're just going to evict your um um your your past memory beyond certain certain window size. Um well trace field here was designed to pres kind of preserve course import information. And so here we're
[03:04:28] just going to you know copy recent frames verbatim and summary slots are going to average previous frames and then the second variant world trace landmark inside targets more like episodic scene memory right so here we have one hot encoded rows that were detected at z boundaries right so points at which rapid appearance changes occur occur so here rather than asking how to compress memory we can think of problem as designing structures parts approximation to full attention over the past history and um yeah about to wrap Just want to show you some visual results. So you can see that here
[03:05:00] baseline kind of um doesn't recover the geometry of this um this garage well while our method does a reasonable job here. Um this is another example uh where the sliding approach fails more like appearance wise even though it gets core structure right. Um need to grab this soon. So I just want to mention one last example. So here we here we do like longer roll out in this um virtual world and our method does a reasonable job can navigate beyond this haststack that you can see here while the the baseline kind
[03:05:33] of loses its gosh respect to the world and starts accumulating error. Okay so um thank you for your attention and um happy to talk more about this during the poster session. >> Great. Thank you very much. Uh, next up we have Ying Wang from NYU. And I'll let you take it away as as soon as you start. I'll start the fivem
[03:06:05] minute timer. Um hi everyone my name is Ying currently a third year PhD student at NYU advised by professor Yang today I'm very happy to present our recent work at a Japa adaptive latit model u in this workshop you will talk a lot about how to train a good war model however we all have to admit that your
[03:06:39] world model is never 100% accurate at prediction which is especially severe if your test environments are different from training and this is often the case in the real If you are planning with an imperfect world model, then your planning is very likely to be suboptimal as well. U for a quick recap, this is a typical framework of MPC with frozen wall model. So we have the train wall model. We do imagine roll out u to select the best action sequence that will minimize the cost between the predicted terminal state and the go state and then we execute the
[03:07:13] first action um get feedback from the environment and then um this will be the next starting point and we enter the next plan loop. So as I said the prediction error might occur which means the action selected on the wrong imaginations will be suboptimal. In this paper, we propose a simple fix. Um, so we do test time adaptation in the closed loop of MPC, which is very simple. After getting feedback from the environment, we just compare it with our imagination and then use it to
[03:07:47] recalibrate our model. This forms a very simple plan, execute, adapt, rep loop without any uh actual data collection phase and uh expert demonstrations. Our default setting is very simple and lightweighted. We only need one gradient step per plan and only updating the last layer of predictor and encoder. We have fourations in the paper. Please check if you're interested. We then tested on four different test time um okay we then tested on four test
[03:08:22] time distribution shift. Um the first one is a shape shift where we train on four shapes and then test it on seven different shapes including three unseen ones. The line plot there shows the success rate and the dash lines means it's um the frozen model the solid lines means it's the adaja and we can see u it has very significant increase for all setups. Uh we also test it on different visual corruptions. We train it on the original push t data but test it on on different
[03:08:56] visual OD settings including blurry salt and pepper noise darkening and different color shifts and again I japa can improve of them. The third one is dynamic shift which I think is very interesting. We train on the default dynamics but tested on dynamics OD settings including low density which causes the agent to move faster under the same force and high damping that causes velocity to decay faster. So um the example show here under the default dynamics the frozen war model can actually lead to a
[03:09:29] success. However in the change dynamics in the high damping environment the frozen model will give wrong predictions and it was stuck. However, after other Japa, it can successfully recover success. In the end, we test it on different M layouts. We train on 25 layouts and then test on five held on layouts. Uh and again, uh al Japa is quite um strong in this case. We can improve the success rate by 6% to 25%.
[03:10:05] We also try Japa on different models with different regularization and feature dimensions. Uh and again Japa improves them on the push t environments consistently and in terms of latency um it only adds on 03 seconds per rep which is very small compared to the um planning time. Uh in the end we have these small scaly experiments where we vary the shape diversity and the size of the data set. Um and as expected um both can improve the um performance.
[03:10:41] But what is more interesting is that we found other japa can actually compensate for limited training coverage by refining the model during deployment. Uh so for example here al Japai is the most data limited setup and can actually outperform the model of the frozen model trained with much more data. Yeah. A very quick takeaway that Japa is an extremely lightweight and efficient as an adaptation model method for Japan war models. Uh and uh we have more
[03:11:15] visualization examples and results in the paper and website. Um, please take the QR code uh and I'm also happy to discuss it during launch and coffee breaks. Thank you. >> Thank you very much, Ying. Um, up next, no, unfortunately not. So, uh, during lunch though, um, next up we have David Clint, uh, who will be presenting on, uh, when, uh, Lega learns a world model. I think I'm still mute muted. No. Okay.
[03:11:52] Do I have to set something up here? ready. Okay, cool. All right, thanks for
[03:12:31] having me. Um, so I'll talk about a little um a little bit of fear behind lega that we've been working on with Yan and Renel. Um, luckily there was a lot of work yesterday from uh David, Jan, and Janette that I can build on. So the idea is the following. This is the problem I care about. If I stand on time square and I want to get home, I can close my eyes and I kind of I can plan my way home. So I can, you know, with a neural network or brain imagine how do I get back home from time square and in my case I would be going to Penn Station, getting the getting on the L and going back out to Long Island. And I'm sure we
[03:13:05] can all close our eyes and like find our way home. I think Yan had that in his talk yesterday. So the theoretical backdrop for this of course is uh lepas and that's um the paper that uh Randall and Jan wrote last year uh with the idea that you have positive pairs like always in Japa and you want to bring them together and at the same time you want to avoid collapse and the way that uh Jan and Reynold proposed it was to train your embedding overall to be gausian. That was the assumption of this whole thing. Okay, cool. So I visited Randall
[03:13:39] last year and he said, "Hey David, I know you work on this whole like uh representation and world model stuff. Um, can you give me a proof for this thing being identifiable, having to learn the right map?" I'm like, "No, this is a terrible idea. I come from ICA and the Gausian is the worst thing you can look for. It's rotation equivarian. It it, you know, like it's it's it's the worst thing. It's like the opposite of what you're looking for with ICA." But Randall is a very persuasive man and eventually he got me to continue working on this and it turns out that there's actually a really nice result hiding
[03:14:12] there especially because it's gausian. So briefly the idea of this is that you have a world and it has to be gausian. You have positive pairs in that latent space. So that's like the true map of Manhattan if you want. They're nonlinearly distorted. So your positive pairs may be stretched and warped apart. But then we learn a representation where we bring them together while making everything gausian. And it turns out that the best way you can unscramble this thing is by basically going back to this map up to a rotation because it's gausian and we all know that's rotation
[03:14:46] invariant. So that's the idea because I only have five minutes. Here's a little cartoon version of explaining that idea with a map of Manhattan. So again, we have the world. We have two positive pairs. So I know where I am. No, I know where I am. I'm close to uh to time square. That means my positive pairs are probably both like I'm standing somewhere on time square. So this is the true coordinates in the world. But what I'm seeing is I don't have access to the true latent variables. They're always hidden away from me. I only have observations and those observations may
[03:15:19] actually be quite dissimilar. So here's two pictures of time square. And if you just take the L2 difference between the pixels, they're pretty far apart. those two images look very very different. So that's your like scrambling and like the distortion we see in the world. So our task is to look at these two things and bring them back together. So we learn our lega on this and what we find is that it learns a map an internal map the one in your brain or the one in your model that has these two things close together and it has to be the same map as the correct map in in the world up to
[03:15:53] a rotation. That's that's kind of where the theory is going. Okay, cool. Um, so practically how does this work? Um, well, we can train it on different simulation data sets where we know what the world map should look like and we can measure how close we got to it and we can compare it to different methods like sigre and uh vigre and infoce and if you scale it up if you increase the dimensionality make the map higher and higher dimensional um you can see that sigre and vic they still find the map in all settings up to a thousand dimensions. uh info NCE uh breaks down
[03:16:27] and as Yan mentioned yesterday that's because in high dimensions filling that batch with contrast of samples that really span the space becomes very hard. We can also ask what if the theory doesn't hold. What if it's not a beautiful perfect gausian? Well, if we make it non-gausian, we can see that sigre holds uh influenc kind of holds up but vicre starts breaking down. So you now have this nice distinction that if you care about scaling uh sigre and vicar work if you care about non-gausian worlds then sigre and oh actually inf as well work. So it seems like you know
[03:17:02] looking at this cigar might be the way forward to to do these things. Um now Jan made a a comment yesterday about this theory being a little construed and I think that's also the main criticism we got from reviewers. Well the gausian world is a world void of structure. It's maximum entropy so it's boring. That's why IC isn't looking for it. Contrive. Thank you. I couldn't think of that. Okay so those are the assumptions. It has to be independent stationary additive. Okay. So we, you know, like this is the theory. I make assumptions and then I derive my theorem. Well, are
[03:17:35] those assumptions just, you know, like theory fairyland? No, I think there's actually something interesting it tells us about building better models. And that's on the next slide. I have to be quick. So this is inspired some by some very cool old neuroscience experiments by um Tolman and Hanzik in the in the 30s. So the idea is you put a rat in a ma in in a maze and you always let it run to the goal and it knows how to find the cheese. Now you have a second group of rats and they kind of play. There's no cheese. They just explore the maze. So we have these two groups. And then a week later we put them into a into the
[03:18:09] same maze, but now the cheese is somewhere else. And they behave very differently. The ones that always have been going straight to the cheese. They have a hard time finding it in a new location. The ones that, you know, just played and explored the maze have an easy time almost like one shot to find the the cheese in the new location. So that is how we we should train our legas and that's exactly what comes out of that theory. You want to do that random walk in the space to learn a beautiful map. So if we do this on a you know typical robotics task the optimal course to get to your goal from this start
[03:18:42] position is you swing your arm up and you're on top of the red ball. That's the best thing you can do. If you do it like this theory suggests you have like an exploratory period and you learn a map you're pretty close to optimal. your arm comes up, it's following the shadow of the correct solution and you land on the goal. It's it's very low cost. But if you train your model always goal focused, so that's biased training data. It's not your nice uh little OU process like in the theory. The arm bends over, it overshoots the goal and then it has to
[03:19:14] correct. So to me, that's interesting because it's something where the theory suggests in the real world maybe we can train our models differently to reduce that goal bias. And there's some cool forthcoming work on that. Um, cool. Okay. And I'll just finish with that video. Um, so you have the world, but in reality it's scrambled. We only see that scrambled version. Le Japa trains on that data and it slowly unscramles the world. It slowly finds the correct map of the world, but only up to rotation. So afterwards, we have to align it. There's some other work on that. And now
[03:19:46] we can use it for planning. If I want to fly from LA to Rio like for iClar this year, the green line is the best solution. But in the scrambled version, the red line is actually the best solution. Good luck finding that for planning. Um, and that's it. Uh, big thanks to Randall for pushing me on this. Big thanks to Yan for inspiring this line of research. And also big thanks of Apple who commented on this and who's really like the the the hidden hero in much of this nonlinear eye research uh, ICI research. Thank you. Thank you, David. Um, next up we have
[03:20:23] Haou. Uh hello everyone. Uh I'm Caillou. Um I'm going to talk about the VREC for word model training. And uh before I dive into the details, uh I want to
[03:20:58] appreciate the help and support from my co-authors Randle and Morgan. Um then what is Visra? Because it's like a new term. So this is a a regularization loss uh based on the same theorem as lega and but it regulate the high dimensional space in you know decompose the regularization in three components like scale shape and the center you know it brings more hyper parameters but so why do we need to do this so because it give
[03:21:34] us the more robust anti-olapse gradient signal so when you're embedding collapses it will provide a stronger signal. The second is this the because of the decomposition uh you can rewe the three factors. So it will bring uh um better result on a low quality data sets and uh the so this column is is pre-trained on the imageet longtailed. So which is a super long tailed uh on on classes uh and it can
[03:22:09] give a slightly better improve uh improvement. Uh the next the next thing is it give a strong out of domain performance. We scale it up to the uh image that 22k uh and then we have we achieve a similar performance to the dino v2 and by using only 10% of the data. Uh so if you are interested in it and you can read the paper here. Uh then we how does it perform in the world model? we just uh replace the regularization by the V rack and we run the similar uh
[03:22:46] experiments and to see what happens with the same setting. Um so we compare so we bring the data from the the word model and some other papers. Uh so there are three classes one is the reinforcement learning the second is pre-trained with with a pre-trained encoder. The third is the end to end training. Um so on this on these four data sets uh this world model achieve a uh higher performance than the end to end uh methods other than the richer because richer you have
[03:23:20] a lot of fluctuations there and then it's some and then this track is kind of sensitive to the to the long long tail of the distribution. So it probably that's the reason um but there is an interesting finding here uh you know the world model paper it mentioned that because the for the two room because it has a low diversity and uh so it's in the low dimension and then the regularization loss is regulating the high dimensional space so that's why it doesn't really perform well on the two room but actually our in our case it's I
[03:23:54] would it's not 100% but it's okay. Uh so probably the reason is the others. Um then we also test on the long horizon um case uh on the push t um and also we bring we just directly borrow the data from the hierarchical planning with the latent word models. uh and from 25 to 75 horizon it the performance reduced significantly which is expected but so this because this is this is a
[03:24:26] fundamental problem of the word model not just the regularization u and we also test on out of domain performance uh we train where the model is only trained on push t but test on the the other objects like lz plus i and etc and then to see what happens and we compare with the lowered model uh we will reproduce the result. So with a similar with the same batch size which is blue and this redish column u the world model is more stable than the uh or have a
[03:25:02] better performance than than the v word model um but when we increase the batch size uh it the visual word model give us a better performance I think it's because um uh the shape loss in the vis uh regularization is the is based on the slice was instant distance which is sensitive to the batch size. So the larger batch size you have it will give you a better distribution um target. So still based on the lower world uh the jetpack algorithm Ethereum.
[03:25:36] So the takeaways are VRA improves the world model on various tasks and but it's still sensitive to those noise and the second is open loop uh long horizon planning task is very challenging and I don't think it's a problem of the regularization. So we need design probably new prediction losses or the model design. And the last is the VR is helpful on the auto domain task as long as you you know uh put the parameter correctly like for example increase the batch size. So that's um yeah that's all my
[03:26:09] presentation. All right. Thank you very much to the the authors uh for contributing to the workshop. So next up we will have lunch. It's going to be up on the fifth floor in the uh Pinco Midway Club. That will run from 12:20 to 1:30. Um so we'll be back in uh this room at at 1:30 uh with Alexandra Faustst giving her keynote. Uh we'll be back into the the world of of more robotics as opposed to uh finance
[03:26:44] and things of that nature. All right, let's go ahead and uh try to
[04:34:15] remain on schedule here. Um, so next up we have Alexandra Faustst uh who is director of research at Google DeepMind and she's going to be uh giving us a talk on uh something that is akin I imagine to recursive self-improvement. Uh so take it away. >> Thank you. Great to be here and thanks for inviting me. The 30 years ago, 1996, the world had decided that there shall
[04:34:50] be no more real nuclear testing and it was controversial decision to put it mildly in the scientific community. There were questions around how we can make sure that our nuclear weapons are safe and secure without actually having the real grounding and whatnot. the what ended up now 30 years later, it actually spun off really investments into high performance computing into simulations right and so on and world is
[04:35:25] better placed for that but it was not an easy decision back then and as AI is now getting into the real world and actually starting to have high consequence and it's getting into high consequence applications high consequence quence is a term that means applications that can cause material damage or human damage if if they go wrong. The AI needs to also kind of wrestle with that question of how much we can do in simulation and how safely we test and
[04:35:58] verify the technology. So what I want to do today is to basically go and look first in some lessons learned from the static environments and and testing in in the static spaces. The look into the scaling then into the interactive worlds, the spaces and the environments where things need to interact. talk about the LLM space and the social interactions and then look at a long longer picture. The the question about
[04:36:34] the simulation and using synthetic data and self-improvement and so on has been controversial in the AI and robotics and so on for the similar reasons. But then as kind of that thread goes in there are some common lessons that are still holding true from from the prior reason. I like to show this video. First off, robotics has fun videos, so it's good to see a fun video. This is a video of the robot that is trying to go from point A to the sink, and we're repeating the
[04:37:08] same task over and over again, and the environment changes. So now it's blocked. The person is there with a cart, and the robot needs to go in and find a different route. This robot only knows the distance to the goal and it can sense the environment through basically this the lighter. So it can sense the distance to the obstacle. There's a custodium. We did not stage that. The and this robot is fully trained in simulation in a static environment and
[04:37:41] this is a reinforcement learning policy that is running it. It is a seven years old. Eight years old video now. Eight years old. So it's it's an oldie but a goodie one. So let's talk about how how how we get to that. Anybody had trained RL before few people you know when you're setting up an RL training unless you're doing a research and your environment is set up that there is tons of decisions you need to make what reward what environment
[04:38:14] you're training what kind of network you're doing you try you look at what you're doing people used to call it gradient grad student descent but what's really happening is that this person here is making sequential decision making. So if a person is doing that, we can have a model that's doing it, right? And that kind of goes into the idea that we actually have two optimization loops going on here. The inner loop where we're developing the agent. This is your optimizing your reinforcement learning reward and
[04:38:46] whatnot. And then you have this outer loop where you're optimizing the hyperparameters to the algorithm. So we can kind of write it write it a little bit more nicely here. And the idea here again like that you're having two agents that are co-raining each other that's the key idea between out RL or or or similar problem and that's what we used for for the robot. Now for the training environment. This was a training environment. Office space, walls, flat walls, no
[04:39:21] furniture, nothing. And basically goes in and experiments and in in this space. What we did now is we varied where where is somebody talking David was talking earlier about the mice with a cheese and exploring mice. We were chang changing the initial conditions and the goal conditions when we're initiating the training. We were adding noise to the sensors to the actuators to the kinematic model. So everything is noisy. Embrace the noise. The and we
[04:39:57] then use this kind of two loop automated learning process to basically we know that the objective here is to reach the goal but then let's learn the rewards. with learn the neural net and so on and from this kind of simple environment it goes zero shot into the real world you plop the policy you put it on on on the robot and so on dog had good my dog had a good day that day we to our tester what's also interesting is that it
[04:40:31] transfers to a different robot modalities the the smaller robot is 100 pounds lighter so the reason this works is that we're making decisions at 10 hertz. So 10 times a second and uh we're and because the world slightly changes and we train with the noise, it basically just adapts and moves on. Further, this algorithm and this setup goes in and works in a wide variety of different dynamical systems. Even though those with a konamic constraints that
[04:41:06] had no prior solution on doing this pointto-point navigation is basically approximate solution to the twopoint boundary value problem. >> So it seems like this is possible because you guys are going to have a lot of because you're training a lot of things. you're simulating a lot of things. So th this is the case and there's kind of this this is the work from 2018 the and it took so to train a single policy it was few hours of training
[04:41:43] we're doing thousand of them so it was maybe five days of training to do that the network here was a two layer network and whatnot but for the time that was tons of compute however and I'm not going to talk about that this policy you can use it and then you can put it in a planning you can kind of put it for for more complex test you can reuse it it's reusable >> so so in modern language would this be like a foundation model for RL that >> yeah yeah >> and is there any takeaways from this
[04:42:16] besides like it's the bitter lesson you put as much data and >> so this is not so the the it's not the bitter lesson the lesson is exactly clean out. Use the noisy data. Embrace the noise the change the initial conditions when you're training. Use the right abstraction here for the simulator. We could have gone with the dynamics. We could have gone added dynamical obstacles, right? And what not we did and this was the simplest one because the simulation was super fast to train and whatnot.
[04:42:50] >> Thank you. >> All right. Then if you kind of go to slightly more complex task, web navigation, think of the form filling. You're going to go on Amazon, you're buying the package or you're doing something, you need to enter your for your address, then you hit okay button. This is now the new room opens and now you have new fields that you need to go in and maybe now it's a Dropbox and whatnot. It's a difficult task for agents to do because it's it's a long horizon. you
[04:43:23] can't test it in or train it in reality because you can't buy a million iPads in order to train train your model. So what we did instead is we're co-raining two networks. First network is teacher and it's producing a web page for the training agents to navigate the so it outputs the the layouts and the pages and and whatnot and then we have a set of agents that
[04:43:58] basically the the teacher produces the exercise they learn how to train and then they get back on to to the teacher feedback. track how the average student is performing and how the best student is performing. And what that then gives to the teacher, teacher is then if nobody can solve the task, so the best student is not doing well, reduce the difficulty, the the challenge is too too much. If the average student is doing well and everybody is doing well,
[04:44:34] increase the diversity of the environment and add more elements and whatnot and they're co-raining each other. And what's interesting here is that early on, I mean, you can see the the environments are fairly simple and then later on they kind of get closer and this is a chain of pages. lesson learned here. And then you you go and look at the performance is the blue line is this learn curriculum. Red line is the manual curriculum. Two lessons here. A these web pages that
[04:45:09] the teacher produces that you're training the model on don't need to be realistic. It can have three first names if you want as long as it has that submit button and you can complete the task. But these three first names and whatn not is a superset of the real distribution. Again simplifying on what can be done and and adding more noise. What the teacher network does learn is that if it does not produce navigable page, so
[04:45:44] there is no submit button and so on, the agents won't complete. So it won't get the reward itself. The but but but the the lesson is we're kind kind of looking at h how to design this world model that you're going to use to train the agent. They don't need to be realistic. They need to be oversampling or the superset o of the reality. The and again we're get getting the zero shot. And the second lesson learned here about the curriculum is if you think of it curriculum is nothing else than you're
[04:46:17] sampling the same data from the same distribution in different order. Curriculum is a permutation on the data on the training data. So order matters. So the these are my lessons from the early days. Pick the right abstraction on the data side. Do the main randomization and it's okay to have the supersets. You actually need to have the supersets and then on the training automate the learning and automate the curricula. All right. This was static worlds. You
[04:46:54] kind of go and navigate and so on. There's lots of conversations yesterday about Whimo and imitation not working with Whimos and so on. Here's the thing with the data Whimo logs or any autonomous driving logs. Not all data is created equal. You have lots of boring data, empty streets at night, right? And so on, nobody. And then when it gets to the difficult scenarios, people in front critical and risky and
[04:47:29] so on, there's either very few data samples or none at all. And you cannot collect that data ethically. You can't set up the sets where you're kind of throwing the kids in front of the car. I mean right so this is a fundamental property of the data if you kind of look at the data that you have that you have a giant holes there and you can kind of go beyond that so that's one you need methods to solve that two is that if you
[04:48:05] start kind of looking the the logs and I think this was partially Jan's comment yesterday is you get into this situation if so green is O and or the autonomous car I should say. Red cars are basically the logs all the star. So if I change the the self-driving car to stop the logs are just going to have cars go through, right? And that's not realistic and it's not helping with the training and whatnot. So first step, you need to have
[04:48:39] a world model that can accurately predict that when a car stops, the other cars are going to stop and then car continues it it's that they're going to continue and so on. The so what we did here is basically train a model from the real logs and provided a hardware accelerated closed loop simulator. It's open source. You can use it. It does decision making at 100 hertz the thousand one kohhertz. So you can kind of do lots of simulation at a time. Now
[04:49:13] that you have that we need to combine to provide a learning solution. We mentioned there is a hole in the data that you can't safely generate the data. There's also a different aspect when it gets to social applications that how matters. Whenever we're kind of doing this A2B navigation policy, shortest path is never the answer.
[04:49:47] Does it make sense? If it was, I would be kind of moving like this, right? And none of us are doing that. So how you break, how you turn, how you have the conversation, all these hows do matter and they're very very difficult to encode into the reward. So reinforcement learning on one side are very good for here is the rule that's your reward you can encode it and it's going to follow that very not easy to specify this house and
[04:50:21] whatn not. So the idea here is that we combine the loss reinforcement learning loss that optimizes for safety reward stay on the road don't hit the car right and so on and then does the imitation learning behavior cloning for everything else and they are weighted together. So when the data starts going out to distribution RL becomes more strong and then otherwise it's behavior cloning. Here's a question. Uh oh, that's yeah. uh when you have the
[04:51:12] reinforcement learning for sort of like the G ground rails uh and the imitation learning to uh have more data such as not throwing the kid in real life but having in the um simulated environment. Um do you also have the uh part where it's kind of um similar to when you pass a driving license? Oh okay. Uh and where do you put this one? Because it doesn't belong in the oil. It doesn't belong in the imitation. Um
[04:51:44] >> so this is only this is a research project, right? So it's not a production system. The this is a research problem that specifically addresses how do we produce a safe policies that also having humanlike behaviors. >> Yeah. >> Uh yes. But uh having this human behaviors needs kind of the checking as um for someone that does the driving test. >> Um we all have this moment of >> so in this case and yeah so we're looking at the distribution of the
[04:52:18] braking and the steering wheel uh acceleration. >> Okay. the so no no no no not following the size you you can expand it to kind of looking okay how much clearance I keep and all that kind of stuff in this particular case we're only looking at the deceleration pattern and the steering angle velocity >> okay >> the and then comparing >> and and then you yeah you compare it with uh like the real Okay okay okay thank you >> yeah So, if I understand this correctly,
[04:52:55] the role of RL is to take care of like the when you're in the tail and you look on the line, you need to figure out what's >> um doesn't that really depend on whether or not you >> sort of like define a good reward and make correct assumptions about what behavior should be? So, it's kind of >> it's not rule based, but like >> we can make pretty good >> assumptions about what should Yeah. >> But if you're in another situation like healthare for example
[04:53:29] I can imagine like it's easy or a naive solution for an agent would be like to protect patient safety I'll do nothing. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. How do you find >> I I'll talk about that a little bit on but long story short for in a health care setting for mult for the clinical decision making we had experts define a reward that had 70 different rubrics and whatnot the so this was very simple. So the results here the yellow is our combined agent lower is better is
[04:54:04] basically the failures on the critical scenarios compared to blue is the behavior cloning so imitation learning. So the delta between the this is what Yan was referring yesterday to or or the likewise red is the also another uh yeah behavior cloning as well method on the lower line here we're looking the blue is the human distribution on of the deceleration when we leave reinforcement learning on its
[04:54:38] own it basically slams the brakes or accelerates as fast as it can because that's what it does. The combined imitation learning has the distribution that's more similar to human and that that that's kind of the the the optimal balance here. Moving on to world of atoms and 3D structure prediction for atom and the protein or the say the the the molecule
[04:55:13] and protein binding. The challenge in this domain is governed by physics the laws and physics but the data for it is very scarce. The entire field has something like 200,000 crystal structures that he can use to train the models from. There's lots of work that went into the architecture using the diffusion models with the equariant layers as head and whatn not. But the additional piece is that we also produced over half a million of synthetic data
[04:55:50] structures that are using physics models. Basically, you make a belleant does not need to be realistic. Back to the lesson from from navigation does not need to be realistic. As long as it's kind of plausible, you see how how the physics and the this molecule and and the protein interact. You put the data in a data set. At this point, the data mixture is twothirds of all the data. the synthetic data is twothirds of the of the full structure and the performance goes in
[04:56:23] goes up with with more synthetic data that we add. In addition to that is that for real drug discovery programs and so on the standard metrics of RMSD less than two Armstrongs and whatnot is not sufficient. What you need to is really need less than one. And the reason is because sometimes you can kind of have mirror images of the atoms and that kind of keeps you within two armstrongs and that's just not good enough. The and also kind of that these things can be
[04:56:57] valid meaning there is no clashes right and and so on. So once you actually start going to the these more stricter metrics the difference between the baseline methods and so on that the synthetic data gets you it becomes even more strike >> for this model how is this I mean related to like alpha fold or atom model. >> So alpha fold three this is this was actually the first model that outperformed alpha fold three >> that that perfor outperformed alpha fold three.
[04:57:29] >> Alpha fold three. >> Yeah. recently I mean there are a lot of I mean the such all atom models they all claim this is the word word of atoms is this the the models I mean in terms of performance comparable to those models like the sod or there are model like open >> as as of October last year when we put it out that was the state-of-the-art >> uh is this a folding model >> is folding model >> folding model yeah okay folding model is not for personal design just care about getting the structure It is to predict how the molecule and a
[04:58:03] protein fold together, >> right? >> Yeah. >> Okay. But I mean your evaluation seems in the drug development. How could the FOD model be utilized for drug the drug target the normal drug design >> the because it predicts in simulation how a proposed molecule >> would interact >> right >> and you don't need to do that experimentally or rather you could iterate right and then be be very selective on what experiments you do >> because it takes once you decide to run experiments it takes three to six months
[04:58:38] to get your experimental results back because then you need to solve the syn synthesis molecule synthesis problem, ship it to the lab, order materials and so on. So being able to iterate. All right. The So now let's kind of two lessons from these interactive environments where we have objects interacting with each other that looking for cheap data whether that's from simulation right or or or so on is important. And I think one thing that we generally tend to
[04:59:14] not look into is how expensive is the data that we're collecting. How much does it take expert right to to generate a sample? If it's a human expert or the experimental data, right, and whatnot. So anything even if data might not be good or perfect and so on, if it's cheaper and there is more of it that's good. And then in terms of the learning that we need this combination of imitation and RL. Now we trained Waymax from logs of driving data. LLMs are trained out of
[04:59:50] the on the internet. They're basically a role model of our communication online to kind of put it simply. So they talked like they talk like us. Question is do they have personalities? They seem like they do, right? So we did actually a study with collaboration with a psychometric department at Oxford. the to look whether they actually have consistent human personality and whether
[05:00:24] big five tests that are developed for humans and so on can be adapted for the LLMs with with results and the answer to that is yes especially the larger and instruction tuned models do have human consistent personalities and two we're giving we're proposing a method or prompting rather that can steer consist consistently these personalities. So on on scale basically nine levels all the five personalities we can say hey I want you I need you to
[05:00:59] be more extroverted right and and so on. So now that we have steerable personalities the question is do they actually hold for the downstream tasks. So the next question then was okay now we prompt the model give it personality that we want it to kind of act out and ask it to produce many med social social media posts and then use a models that that predict the personalities of from the media post that basically extract the
[05:01:33] personality reverse engineer the personalities from the social media posts and we see that okay in the social media IA models that were prompted to be the with the highest uh neuroscism are having lots of words like hate and so on. The where is the lowest on the lowest end having lots of happy dinner, family and fun and so on. But then we're comparing to humans. The blue line is human personality levels being extracted
[05:02:07] from the social media posts. And then all other colors are pick your favorite LLM. So what does it mean that these numbers are higher? There was research like three days ago from Professor Ben at Harvard that says elements do not have emotions. Can you have personality without emotion? >> You can certainly have personalities without emotions because there's two different things. And I'm not psychologist. Yeah. Yeah. The
[05:02:43] but my question here is how how does one interpret this graph personal LLMs have bigger better higher personalities than one personality over another >> I I'd say they're more exaggerated ated. Yeah, they're more cartoonish version of >> Yeah. So, if we're going kind of
[05:03:15] extroverted, we're going extroverted all the way. The >> your own perception that >> so you can kind of dig into deeper because again like humans this is one distribution. It's really not the the only distribution and so on. And with the personalities there's lots of things around and don't quote me which things have the correlation that if one goes up I think ex conscientiousness and extraversion are correlated and probably some cultures are they're more
[05:03:47] correlated than others right there is a lot of nuance there that can be Do we do we see any issues with uh yes actually there is some data that shows that for well let's say Gemini models and and and so on the that
[05:04:23] certain cultures would prefer different personality traits. So if the model is kind of prompted with being more extroverted that's more acceptable and likable in the US for example whereas some other cultures and so on. So there is that effect. >> Oh, that that I don't Yeah, this is all
[05:04:56] at the prompting. Yeah, the that's a good question. >> The baseline >> prompted to produce text >> that maps to a >> Yeah. >> personality trait or is it the so the blue line specifically is from a prior work that introduced the model that was basically just done on the human studies and so on. So I'm not quite sure about their methodology. I think they were just basically harvesting media social media posts across the board. Yeah,
[05:05:29] >> I've looked at some data maps to this personality trait versus explicitly told to write some content in this >> I am not sure. Yeah, but it's it's a good question. The and I'm sure when they were validating the methodology, they had to basically do both in in a way the to to have the ground truth. The larger point that I'm trying to make here is that LLMs are the world models of human personalities. the
[05:06:03] and then there is also the in context learning. Now with kind of models having the larger context and whatnot, we can actually add more examples in the context of the model. And turns out that if we start going so the gray line is one, two to four, three shots, 32 shots. Green line is we're doing 50 shot, 500 shot and so on. adding more examples to the prompt, it actually improves the performance. Not only improves the performance, but we can correct the pre-training biases.
[05:06:37] So if we start training the model that blue is red and red is blue and we provide enough examples in a context, it's going to actually start switching the label. Point is your context now becomes an environment and it's more or less subject to to the similar learning laws and whatnot that we kind of saw with the training. What's more interesting is I'm all about cheap data, right? The So what's
[05:07:11] cheaper? Labels are still expensive. It's unsupervised learning is cheaper. So your left so this lime is the standard in context learning with the ground truth. The green one is unsupervised. So I'm not giving an example. This is math. We're just basically telling you we're going to give you these math problems without the solutions. And then red one, the the blue one is reinforced in context learning, which means I'm
[05:07:43] going to give you an example and I'm going to have you propose the solutions and I'm going to have you correct the solutions and whatnot. And interestingly enough, both unsupervised and model generated reinforced in context learning tend to outperform the supervised learning and it transfers. So if I do many shot in context learning on math problems and then I give it the Google proof QA different domain and so on, it actually
[05:08:18] show shows the results as well. Why to to to a certain extent the we talked about curriculum being the permutation right on on how we present the data to to the model. We also know that the distribution this is from the RT1 that they've done the that the diversity of the data in the domain that we're training for matters the so they did the study is that if they reduce the
[05:08:54] number of data it mattered whether this was basically reduce the diversity of the data that the model has versus kind of just reducing the the the number of the samples it has. the there is this concept of in distribution and we kind of hear like your g data needs to be in distribution and then there is this concept out of distribution and so on. I like to call it we really need for to go to that goldilock principle that where the data is just at the edge of the distribution in order to kind of
[05:09:28] improve the the learning. So what curriculum does is basically pushes the boundary provides just the right challenge and turns out these lessons on the curriculum and just out of distribution and so on actually do carry for the incontext learning as well. So the same basically rules that apply to post- training or training hold for the incontext learning. >> Yep. It is effectively what's happening here that to come up with the right solution, you need different pieces of
[05:10:02] information. As you just throw more and more in there, by random chance, you would be more likely to have the right pieces. The >> the hypothesis here for for this particular piece and this kind of go into the selfcorrection as well is that the human provided solutions are way out of distribution for the model that what model basically trained and what not is not expecting that form of the answer. So when it proposes its own
[05:10:38] solution, it's closer to its own distribution that it can learn from is going to be actually the the the key point behind the next. So as you're progressing learning in general, this goes for the RL that you need to have the exploration, but you can't have the full exploration always. It needs to stay near that safety or or the knowledge envelope o of the data. And is that literally like a output formatting thing or is it >> it is basically what data and I would
[05:11:12] love to see for the older data scientists here. I would love to see more this not be a tribal knowledge but rather be a more formulated mathematical statistical theory theory of learning and whatnot. the but right now it's a tribal knowledge >> previously you mentioned personality of the my first question is how do you measure
[05:11:45] um according to the behavior whether the still like holds its own personality my second question is that uh what is the training after like after making more accurate results of surf test or are we tuning the personality so that it's best the activity. >> Yeah. So for personality, the first question was it kind of seems to us that they have personalities. Let's verify that that is really the case in the
[05:12:18] sense that they exhibit the personality traits that are consistent with humans. And this is a mouthful. We're not saying that they have personalities. They have person they exhibit behaviors, right, that mimic human personality traits. And in order to do that, you kind of need to make sure that the tests were measuring the the say same things. Psychometric does that. The the second question is now that you have that that that you can kind of steer and correct. This is it's a tool. It's it's a piece
[05:12:51] of knowledge that that you can use it for. I'll I'll talk bit more later on how we're using that for medical decision making the when we're simulating patients that you can kind of prompt it for adversarial testing for example that certain patients or people are going to be more adversarial than others right and so on and you can expose your model to to wider variety of of people from about
[05:13:28] what's the so the in psychometrics or psychology there's like they have the concept of the big five personality traits that are extroversion uh conscientiousness aggressiveness the narcissism And I don't know what the OP I'll remember. So and and and they have a battery of the tests that they go in and ask questions, right? And so on to to to
[05:14:01] assess each of the properties and then they have established tests, right? And the questions to to modeling from it own shading or are you to have to model? >> So this is basically just what the models had already soaked up by being trained. This this is all kind of looking at the delivered model what they have
[05:14:37] the all right was all right so let's now talk about so talking about cheap data what is cheaper data than the model generated data and wouldn't it be nice if we can yes I know we need to kind of get some human feedback and some label data but can we squeeze more use out of our training and have model basically teach itself and so on. So would it be nice if we had like a math problem that poses a problem here and then says selfcorrection instruction
[05:15:12] there might be an error here can you figure it out and then the model goes in and says oh yeah I found the error here is the solution turns out this doesn't work out of the box for two reasons one is this distribution shift of the selfcorrection that on the labels SFT the supervised fine-tuning. This is your red line on how model performs on the the SFT training. This blue line
[05:15:49] here is how it performs on the validation test. Okay, fine. We expect that. If you ask model then to provide self-generated validation, it drops. The performance drops. So that this is this is one reason again the the because it's it's different from the SFT this the answers are different from the SFT solutions that that were given during the training. Second part if you start kind of doing this multi-step prompting and so on the models tend to really kind of get
[05:16:22] convers conservative and not change their answers. So in order to enable them to propose their own solutions and correct them, we need a two-step multi-stage two-step RL training process. Step number one is basically keeping the first answer closer to the original answer and it's encouraging model to increase the correctness in the second answer. It's counterintuitive but it's basically
[05:16:56] teaching it think bit longer term and then in the second step now we're saying okay now that you know how to improve yourself on the second step with your own suggestion let's now improve on the first step answers as well the so it's using basically this this two-step loss the so the then the results the results score score is our method. So this is on the right. This is green is the accuracy at the first step. Blue is the accuracy
[05:17:29] in the second step. So this twostep multi-turn learn from your examples instead of the SFT outperforms on a on math even on the first step on the second step on the this was the human on coding task. the model on the first step was not as good, but then the second step it really gets it. The question here is okay fine like if you're going to go and prompt my model several times and so on can you continue doing that or if I had a fixed budget of
[05:18:04] I don't know 32 16 or whatn not samples should I just do basically parallel sampling and pick the best of n answer or should I use that for the multi-step so it turns out that doing this sequential self selfcorrection actually keeps getting better even though we train it on two steps we can expand it to to 32 and so on steps the and it's improve it's it's better it's better use of your inference time
[05:18:36] budget than parallel sampling and uh performance does not degrade okay the oh it's five minutes that's all right so the let's kind of put all this together for the multic the the clinical decision making triaging task. What we really want here is an agent to be able to answer basically take a patient do an
[05:19:09] interview understand what's going on with them what their symptoms are and then decide either in the diagnosis or send them to the ER and whatnot. In order to train that model, you need to have a good simulator. What is a simulator in this case? It's an LLM, right? That then we can basically do this multi-step prompting. And this model for the prompting will have the demographics piece. We'll have okay, this is 45 year old male, right? And what not? Well, what their demographic data is and so on. It going
[05:19:44] to has their personality. This is an extroverted person, right? and and and so on. The it has a summary of the case and then it's also going to have things that they won't share voluntarily or involuntarily with a doctor because people do that. They they might not remember, they might not know it's relevant, right? And so on sometimes they're embarrassed. Often time they're embarrassed, but that is reality. So we can use an LLM as this simulator these patients and and basically prompt them
[05:20:17] and to to create the scenario situation the and then we train the agent. It's basically multi-turn RL agent reward here is a 70 rubric that was designed by physicians say that is looking from things from diagnosis from management intake communication style and and so on very comprehensive and then it does up to 60step
[05:20:51] dialogue back and forth including tool used to write the notes right and so on and think okay let me try to remember this put this in a medical note come back ask for more information and so on the this work is now in clinical trials with included health with 5,000 patients across the US and the results are looking promising >> so so this kind of begs the question of this is like a RL version of it and then a
[05:21:25] bridge is actually reporting this data. Right. So, so the do you know I guess it's two different companies, but do you know whether doing this the RL way or just straight up taking say something like the recorded logs of a doctor patient session and training on it like say maybe a bridge is doing. >> But if but if you have logs this is the static data. This is the offline and we know that that collapses.
[05:22:00] So, so you really need to have the interactive communication right and so on for which you need to have simulation the so I know we're we're kind of at time but I will just go through so add model generated data and multi-turn RL as keys the and and the key here is really kind of the point we have the world model you need to have a world model you need to have your training agent that then is basically creating this noisy synthetic data and that's the flywheel that your
[05:22:33] world model is probably trained with some self-supervised methodology and your training agent needs to have some RL on it the because it needs to be able to kind of go outside of the distribution and I have one minute but I do want to kind of leave on with one thought as the agents are getting better there is this concept in autonomous driving of the levels of autonomy and we can start thinking about AGI in terms of the performance and I think one way to
[05:23:08] define it is basically across is a two-dimensional one is the performance from no AI to superhuman and then on the other side is from basic and narrow scope tasks to more general tasks. So at a like level zero narrow would be your calculator. It does one task, does it well, no AI on the level zero, general would be your mechanical Turk can do any task a human can do, but there's no AI. Humans doing
[05:23:42] all the jobs, all the work, right? We're thinking and then we can kind of do these levels in between based on the percentile of the human skill. This slide is at this point maybe two and a half or three years old. I did not update it. the at two and a half years we're still thinking are we at a competent AGI certain capabilities around the writing maybe code and so on have improved are they above 50 percentile I wouldn't say so I think it's been
[05:24:16] certain capabilities maybe we're kind of inching more from the left to right here and so on but it's been sitting here more interesting question to ask is how we use this technology Right. So at we can use it with no AI. There is a human does everything. At level one it's a tool then becomes consultant collaborator experts and so on. We can also look into what would that do to the society at level one is being tool. We can start seeing some diskilling and
[05:24:48] maybe that's okay right certain skills and kind of ro memory and and whatnot might not be necessary and so on. And we can look at it for some certain engineering component and so on. Narrow AI is sufficient for that. At the consultant level, we can still see some overrust over reliance. I think we're kind of seeing that in the society to to to a certain extent and we can also expose ourselves to the targeted manipulation and whatnot and and and so on. Then then later on we can see rapid societal change. the we can see mass
[05:25:24] labor displacement and so on as things are progressing and so on. It is one way to have to start the conversation. It's absolutely not not the only way to do it, but at least let's have the conversation. And one thing I really want to kind of leave you with the we started with nuclear testing being banned and so on. The AI technology we're building today, we're really building a powerful technology that can do a lot of good to democratize access
[05:25:58] to education, to health care, to number of other things. Also, in the wrong hands, it can cause a lot of harm. It's a technology and what we do with it, it's up to us. So I'm kind of inviting all of you to really kind of think before you commit and you choose what you do to choose wisely. Thank you. >> All right. Uh thank you Alexandra. I think while we get the students or uh
[05:26:31] authors set up to uh present maybe time for like one or two questions. Hey, just ask.
[05:27:16] >> I wouldn't. That's that's my point. My point is that I did this slide two, three years ago and it's still we're still there. Yeah, I'm waiting when it when I need to update it, but >> yeah, >> the clinical context, how do you attempt to generalize where certain conditions are more prevalent among others than others? There's also language as
[05:27:51] well like doctor patient conversation conducted way differently based off of the language that those two parties. This is the data right the add more data to the scenarios that that has more of the corner cases and and whatn not the models are going to pick on that >> so that it has to incorporate it into the foundational llaps for that synthetic flywheel to really kick into gear. So yeah your your sim again your your simulation and your world models
[05:28:25] need to be models don't do well out outside of the distribution right I mean there there is no then in order to kind of get the models to be able to perform on the variety of the places you want them to perform your simulation data sets need to be larger and cover more space right the and does not need to be super realistic and whatnot, but if the model never learned about malaria, for example, it won't know what to do with malaria.
[05:28:58] >> That's really more on that world model side of things. >> Thank you. >> All right, thank you so much. >> Thank you. >> Now, we'll transition to the lightning talks. So, first up, we have Xiang Tang. >> One one more thing. Um, and so Xiang Tang, I'll I'll let you take it away as as soon as you're ready to go. >> You have five minutes. >> Everybody, >> I'm currently a postto working at UBC. Today I will introduce our recent work
[05:29:33] the sequial japa. Uh, in this work we revisit the basic part of Japa. How should we choose and organize the regions that the model predicts. Okay, let's first recap the IJA. I JJ uses a single contest block to predict the representations of various targets blocks from the same image. Importantly, um the prediction happens in the latent space rather than pixel space. Uh which makes the framework more semantic and more efficient. This is why we choose JPA as a strong and clean starting
[05:30:07] point. Um in IPA the targets regions are predicted at random and indep are selected at random and predicted independently. However when we uh when we human look at one image we first look at the most salient region and then look for the second and contest contextual informations is selective and sequential attention manner. So this leads uh this lead leads to our main question. Can predictive self-supervised learning
[05:30:40] benefit from an explan explicit notion of where and in what order to make predictions? Uh in our descript JPA the basic idea contains three steps. The first is where use attention information to identify formative regions and the second is order organize regions from primary to secondary cues and the third predict predict the regions in bending one by one along this sequence. So the synchro jar turns japa target prediction from an ordered set prediction into a
[05:31:13] discriminatively ordered sequential prediction. Okay, let's uh let's see how distal Japa fits into the Japa framework. Um concurrently we make two changes in Japa. The first is region prioritization. We first use the target encoder to predict to generate a salency map and extract the informative and long over overapping regions and the secondly the sequential prediction. uh we use the predictor to estimate the nest region in bending conditioned on the regions that
[05:31:46] comes before it together with its position. Um so the overall JPA framework remains unchanged. Uh what changed is how we construct and predict the targets. Uh an important question is that whether uh region selection or sequential prediction alone is enough. The answer is no. um enabling either each component in isolation um decreased the performance. Um the clear gun can only appears when we combine the dispointed regions with sequential prediction. So the two components are not independently
[05:32:21] useful. They are synergistic. Um more interestingly uh not every uh order helps. random or inverse order um can actually hurt the performance and a simple special order can bring brings some improvements but the gun become becomes larger as the sequence becomes more semantically meaningful. So this suggested that um the sequential prediction itself is not enough. The trajectory uh need to be semantically
[05:32:54] grounded. Uh we also scale the method across different model sizes. Uh disclo jar uh improves over I jar for we base large and we huge. Um that means the the benefit does not disappear when we scale the model. Uh and the improvement is not limited to im imageet classification. we can see consists against in fground recognition object detection segmentation and low-level racing tasks. So to summarize
[05:33:29] uh our desync jpa introduced two simple ideas into ja focus on discret uh focus on focus prediction on discretive regions and organize um prediction along the meaningful sequence. Um importantly we still predict the u predict entirely in the latent space and the learned encoder can be used for uh normally for the downstream tasks. Uh our main takeaway is that what to predict uh matters but how we organize the predict
[05:34:02] trajectory also matters. Um thanks for your time and attention. Thank you. Um, so next up we have East Mini. Uh, not quite yet. There we go. Yep. You have five minutes. >> Let me start the clock. Okay. Um, good afternoon everyone. My name is Milenjjo
[05:34:37] from the University of Illinois Urbana Sag and today I'll present Vitam our video tactile action model for contactri manipulation. Uh how do I go? Okay. Yeah. So VM VA have become increasingly more capable. So here we see examples of a model that has to perform a task that is long horizon. It consists of many subtasks and it can perform well even when we have a disturbances such as visual distractions, random uh localizations
[05:35:12] and unseen lightning. So current VLAS are typically uh capable because of two factors. uh they are powered by strong vision language prior and we train these models on large scale uh multimodel data like for example internet human scale uh internet uh scale videos but current VA still struggle with a lot of tasks especially out of distribution sequences due to weak state tracking. So we have a robot that misses the boat but
[05:35:46] continues with the plan and pours the ingredients onto the table or on the right we have a wiping that depends on contact pressure and sleep. So those kind of signals are weakly observable from cameras and uh current VA struggle with this kind of contactrich manipulation due to limited physical feedback. So these failures have led to two branches of contact aware manipulation. Uh the top row is tactile or for conditioned VAS. So kind of like
[05:36:19] reactive policies where we add touch tactile feedback as an observation and the bottom branch is a tactile word action models. So models that jointly predict how tactile, visual and physical states will evolve uh before acting. So, Vitam is one of the first works that adapts a pre-trained video action model and extends it into uh predictive video backbone that processes tactile images and predicts visual tactile dynamics and in a very data efficient way. So if we think about the data, we roughly require
[05:36:53] 10 minutes of uh teleoperated demonstrations per task without separately training a tactile encoder or external uh risk mounted uh force tensor uh sensors. So you can uh read more in our paper or visit our poster. But I want to briefly cover like results. Uh so here we have like two different tasks. uh one we have like a chip which is a very fragile like it's a task that requires very delicate move of something that we don't want to
[05:37:27] break and we also have like a wiping whiteboard task that requires like a stable contact because you know the whiteboard can be very slippery right so not only we can perform well on those tasks but we actually can predict a future tactile as faithfully as a future video right without pre-training on you know tactile encoder. So how do the baselines perform? Uh vision baselines fail on these tasks because you need like physical feedback
[05:38:00] as I mentioned and uh tactile u reactive tactile uh methods perform again like fail might be like on whiteboard like 50% performance. So if we look at also uh the contact dynamics, we see that uh uh our model has like a stable uh contact uh for the wiping task for example. It means that it doesn't put excessive uh pressure right on the whiteboard. So higher stable uh contact ratio means like smoother contact dynamics.
[05:38:35] So I'll use my last minute to introduce my lab and the work that we do. So, we're interested in world models and physical world understanding. We're interested in unified generative models because these are like models that are broad and controllable and have the kind of generalistic properties we're looking for. And we're also interested in using those generative models for embodied uh intelligence. And the last slide is some of our more recent work. So generating egocentric videos given one high level goal in just
[05:39:09] one image or long horizon reactive policies. They use kind of like a Latin word model I would say to track progress for a task and physics aware uh video generation like models that jointly predict latent uh physical dynamics and future video uh frames. So you can take a look at our work. Have three seconds. Uh, thank you. Okay, next up we have Gayen uh
[05:39:51] presenting from the University of Michigan. Take it away. Thanks. Uh my name's Gayen. I'm presenting from the University of Michigan work in collaboration with uh my co-author Avi back there and his adviser Juniper. Uh so we're interested in the question sometimes maybe many times in foundation models a given input sequence might be compatible with multiple states of the underlying world or it might even be compatible with multiple dynamics that gave rise to that statement. Uh so we talked earlier today about how a user model is a type of world model. So if a user says to a
[05:40:25] model, capture the flag from the target server, uh that input might be compatible with a world in which felonies are fine or in which felonies are not okay as a as a strategy uh for the model to use. As a sort of general, this is sort of a specific case of more general problem. Again, we have two worlds. They both can generate a given observed sequence. And we want to know uh inside the model, how is a situation like this represented? uh and how does the model decide whether to apply the rules from a given world or a given hypothesis about the world. Uh
[05:41:00] to answer questions like these well in a foundation model is very difficult because we don't actually know what the correct model of the underlying world is. So instead we use a toy model and we build on a toy model that has already been sort of proven to have nice properties uh which is a board gameello. So what we do is we take a board game, we play random legal moves in that game, we feed just those moves and nothing about the game to the model and train it to predict next legal moves and find and prior research has already shown that if
[05:41:32] you do this, you find that the model reconstructs the uh underlying state of the board in its residual stream in a linear way. So we take this uh established toy model and we make a couple small alterations to it by introducing variants of the rules that generate different sequences of legal moves and different underlying board states. Uh but those sequences overlap at least a little bit with the sort of classic rules. So if you see part of a sequence of moves, you might not know immediately whether it's from
[05:42:04] the classic Aello or the no middle flip a in which uh you flank when a player flanks opponents pieces only the outermost flanked ones flip. So that's an example of a change to the rules. So the same board, the same rules uh uh enforcing which moves are legal, the same syntax, but the different latent board update means that different sequences eventually are legal. we have other types of variants in our uh poster. So we want to know what happens when we train a model on mixtures of sequences from a classic variant of oll and a altered variant. The first thing we
[05:42:39] should say is that just in terms of strictly of performance all of the models we train uh perform basically as well. So these are eight layer GPT style transformers trained on around 40 million sequences. Uh and all of them learn to predict legal next moves very very well. It doesn't matter whether they're predicting legal nexus in one game or the other or a mix of the two games. We also find that similarly to prior research, we can use a linear probe to extract out the a representation of the correct underlying board state given just the uh sequence of moves that were
[05:43:12] played. And we can do that for two board states. So for instance, a given sequence might be valid in two different games. So then the model should properly have a hypothesis that there could be one board state or there could be another board state and we find that both of those board states are represented one for either game. Sort of confusingly those representations turn out to be causally equivalent. So uh taking a representation of the board uh under one world hypothesis and intervening on it to like change the represented the
[05:43:44] latent represented board. that intervention works the same regardless of whether the uh sequence is sampled from one game or the other. And this is sort of a evidence that at the end of the day there's sort of one base representation of the board and then sort of game specific perturbations on top of it. So our next question is how does a model decide when to apply a certain set of rules or another? Um and the benefit of a toy model is that we know what the optimal sort of posterior probability that a given sequence came
[05:44:17] from one uh dynamics or another is and we can ask whether that probability is represented linearly in the residual stream of the model. This is very similar uh technique using linear probes to back out a uh quantity that we know to look for. And we find that in this comparison between the classic othell and the one where the only the outermost tokens flip uh that posterior probability the probability that a given sequence comes from one game or the other is only properly represented after uh the fifth layer of the model. So this is sort of a a
[05:44:51] computation that emerges suddenly in the fifth layer and after that point uh that information is present otherwise it's not. And we can actually use that very same direction that we had used to uh identify that posterior probability of one world versus the other to steer the model to act as if one dynamics or another apply to generate next tokens under only one of the two two sets of rules. But we can only do that in the fifth layer. So there's this highly localized place where the uh internal computation determines which set of
[05:45:23] rules are being applied. So in conclusion uh we establish a toy model paradigm where mixed worlds generate the observed data. We find that the model trained in that paradigm develops a single shared representation space and a single latent direction controlling which sort of world model to apply on top of that representation. Uh you can find us at the poster session after. Thanks. >> Great. Thank you. And our final talk of this session.
[05:46:18] All right. Take it away, Hamza. Five minutes. >> Okay. Hi, I'm a PhD student with uh my name is Hamza. I'm a PhD student with Randall and Bradford. And today we're going to be talking about financial representation learning uh as the first step towards moving towards financial world modeling. So the first thing we need to figure out is how do you train a good encoder for you know midish frequency financial data. Uh but the first reason is why do we care about financial world modeling? Uh a financial world model could be used for many things. It could be used for eval evaluating the health of the economy. It could be used for monitoring market manipulation and legal market activity.
[05:46:51] And it could ultimately its use is that firms and participants can um plan their actions accordingly uh and optimize uh for what they're kind of looking for. Uh so if you follow the financial machine learning literature, you'll know data sets are extremely scattered. Um there's different data sets which cover different time periods at different frequencies. Um most of them are daily frequency or lower which is not a lot of data. Um some of them most many of them are private some of them uh may be constructed with uh survivorship or look ahead bias and so this kind of motivates
[05:47:25] first of all a very high quality and scalable data set uh in partnership with massive uh formerly polygon we're releasing market one it's a data set of uh oh I'm sorry I a little uh it's a data set of top of the book aggregates and uh trading data for all US equities from 2008 to 2025. This leads to nearly one trillion observations. Uh we have a lot of scaling studies in the paper. This kind of enables that. Um and what you can kind of see even naively looking at this
[05:47:59] is that there are regime shifts over time. So this is just one particular encoder with one particular hyperparameter configuration uh trained on all months in our sample. And you can see uh yeah there's regime there's regime shifts over time. And you know if you were to naively choose to only evaluate say on the last year of data 2023 2024 you get a very biased estimate of how this encoder performs. So uh the scale is important and in our evaluation we choose to sample 32 random months across so that we can get um a proper breath of different marker regimes.
[05:48:34] Um so SSL theory suggests that good representations are useful for downstream tasks. Uh in finance we kind of think of that usually as prediction tasks and the three kind of things we're thinking about especially for a single stock time series which we're looking at is predicting the change in price return uh predicting the change in volatility and predicting the change in spread which you kind of treat as a proxy for trading costs um and we kind of see we evaluate a variety of SSL uh objectives such as lega dino bol and a variety of augmentation such as time warping uh
[05:49:07] selecting positive pairs that are the same stock sorry different stocks viewed at the same time. Uh we try a variety of that. This is just one such combination uh training a lega with time warping and we find it to be highly competitive uh with the supervised model on both return and volatility change. Uh we primarily focus on the 15minute information coefficient for returns but we look at uh all three tasks um at many different horizons to kind of get a picture of what's going on. Uh we're also very interested in the latent structural organization. Um you
[05:49:42] know a good financial world model should be organized in an economically meaningful way. So for example we want to evaluate does it cluster stocks does it cluster um views that are on the same day together compared to views on different days. Uh we also care about if it captures and prioritizes the latent statistical structure factors that are kind of driving returns. Um, and so just to kind of summarize some of the results quickly, we have like 18 different methods between all of our supervised augmentations and SSL strategies. Uh, and we rank their
[05:50:16] performance on each task from 1 to 18. And so then we can kind of look at a correlation heat map. So the first thing we kind of show here is the three prediction tasks are highly correlated. Um, not a huge surprise. Though what's kind of interesting is that they're uncorrelated or in fact inversely correlated with some of our organization tasks which kind of hints that some models are learning this these representations useful for future prediction and other models are learning these representations useful for not necessarily useful but more kind of economically meaningful. Um in fact some of these economically
[05:50:50] meaningful tasks are also kind of orthogonal. Uh as you can see with this negative.35 uh what that what that's saying is that some firms learn some encoders learn to kind of cluster by firm others kind of learn to cluster by like time. Um and finally this factor structure stuff seems to be kind of highly correlated with the predictive tasks. Um and so if all you cared about was just maximizing your ability to kind of forecast the future uh the best thing at least right now that you can possibly do is train a multi head supervised. So train it on the all three tasks at once
[05:51:24] and when you back propagate kind of normalize the gradient. Oh, you have three heads. Um and that seems to kind of be about as well as you can do if you just want to forecast the future. Uh if what you care about the most is kind of getting an economically meaningful latent structure. Uh our JBA setup seems to kind of learn that the best. Uh somewhere in the middle kind of on the efficient frontier. uh training lego with time warping and training bol also with the time warping augmentation um seems to be kind of an excellent trade-off uh and finally there's a lot of other methods that sit kind of
[05:51:58] somewhere inside of the efficient frontier but it kind of goes to be said that some of these methods are um generalist so for example BOL is like ranked number four on like every single task whereas like same stock crops is like really really good at one task and like the worst at all the others. And so um that kind of goes to my final point. Um encoder quality is highly multi-dimensional. Um it's a tough thing to evaluate because there's so many ways you can um yeah we released marketet which is a permissively licensed massive data set which can enable high quality
[05:52:32] research and financial machine learning and enable scaling. Uh and yeah this is a step towards a financial world model. So right now we're working on event conditioning. Um there's certain events which we know drive a lot of information in the markets. um earnings calls are a good example and that's kind of what we're working on right now. So, thank you. >> Great. Thank you, Hamza. Um so, now we have a coffee break running until 3:15, so about 25 minutes. Um and then when we come back we will have uh a little
[05:53:04] continuation of the finance theme uh with three folks from finance markets uh or finance and markets uh including Khi. So and enjoy the the coffee break Hi, Nicole. Can you hear us?
[06:01:49] >> I can hear you. Can you hear me? >> Yes, we can. Excellent. >> Perfect. All working. All good. >> All right. Looking good so far. >> Perfect. >> Thank you. >> Great. I'll be back on around I guess if the first two are taking 25 minutes each in about an hour, maybe a little bit earlier. And I'll be tuned in to the live stream prior. Oh, ask her. Can she share her slides? >> Oh, sorry. Uh, before you do, can you share your slides just so we can see? >> I don't have any. >> Oh, you don't have any? >> I don't have any. >> Okay, then we will see you. Uh, >> yeah, we we're we're not a machine
[06:02:21] learning institution, so >> All right, sounds good. >> I figure I could I can make up some formulas, but it's probably better just to talk through things. >> Perfect. >> Great. Thank you guys so much. >> Thank you. >> Awesome. Bye. to search my Gmail. That's as much.
[06:25:07] >> It's good for background. See, they have all of YouTube indexed >> and they can search. >> They can find Oh my gosh. >> Is there any interview that someone's ever done and they'll give you quotes from it? >> Need a quote from so and so. Go. >> Ah. All right. You good to start? >> Okay. Uh this. All right. Um, so next up is a panel of
[06:25:55] experts from uh, finance and markets. And so we're going to kick it off with Ido. Um, he's going to have about 20 minutes to give a talk. Um, Q&A along the way is is okay. >> Yeah. Um, but but there will be an opportunity, you know, at the end of the talks, the panelists are going to sit down and and you'll be able to ask questions and things then as well. Um so you know if you have a clarifying question I guess go ahead and ask that but but otherwise kind of hold off until the end. Um so with that you know take it away 20 minutes.
[06:26:28] >> Thank you very much. Thank you for inviting me. Always a pleasure to be at the University of Chicago especially in the Booth School of Business. Um and just to you know slightly qualify I feel I'm a statistician and a computer scientist. I do uh spend a lot of time thinking about finance problems and I aimed for the PhD students or people who are inexperienced with finance with my you know beginning remarks. Uh and so we'll see where it goes but hopefully it'll be fun and informative. Okay. So
[06:27:03] first of all you know when I you know look at war models in the literature there's going to be different people talking about war models meaning different things and even you know yesterday um we saw for example dreamer v3 right in which you know the latent dynamics trained with a policy in the loop whereas when I think of a war model what I really mean is a mechanistic model like that's like a what you would think of as a mental model right that's good enough to explore what is scenarios against conditional on actions and
[06:27:36] capable of producing counterfactuals. But you know uh if you talk to Eric Shing for example he'll think about war model where sometimes the world is the output and so you know just a first clarification when you read papers about war models try to figure out u which bin you know among these four beans you fall in. Um, I should also say that this being a panel, the slides are mostly for me to remind myself what I want to talk about. Um, I'm happy to share the slides with everyone. I won't read every single word on a slide. So, you know, in the in
[06:28:11] the interest of time. Okay. So, first of all, if you are thinking about financial markets and you're thinking of building a world model on financial data, you know, you need to learn about financial data. And there's at least eight layers of financial data that we can talk about. Okay. Okay. So the first one is like oh you go on you know one of the you want to know what Apple stock or Google stock is priced at today you know and you can see these line charts these are great see what people are familiar with um if you go on MSNBC that's what you see
[06:28:45] right in reality you know at every point in time in every you know people call them minute bars uh 15 minute bars hour bars but in every single unit of time interval of time there'll be uh an opening price, a closing price, a high price, a low price, and some volume. So there's actually sideby-side box plots that um eventually get collapsed right into this line chart. Then within each one of these box plots, there's actual trades and every single trade has a potentially different price. Okay? And
[06:29:19] it happens at a different point in time within this little let's call it, you know, minute interval, right? Then again if you go one layer deeper there's the so-called order book. So the trades are just you know here on the order book on one side you know you see uh people were trying to sell at a certain price on the right side people are trying to buy a certain price when you know there's two matching offers from the sell side and the buy side there'll be a trade but at every given point in time there's many many levels or many many um trades that
[06:29:54] not being matched. Okay. And so that's that's the order book. And people when people talking about, you know, at what level your order book update landed at, they just literally mean, you know, if it was like the top, the second, the third, and so on and so forth, right? The depth of the book that people refer to sometimes is how many layers are there in the order book that are active. Now, the order updates in the order book, they come into packets. And so each packet of information may have one trade, may have multiple trade during
[06:30:27] you know high volume like opening and closing usually. And so there's an additional layer. The packet itself contains more information than just the information in the order book. And uh you know for example in the US there's like 17 there's many exchanges 17 we call them fully lit exchanges which are exchanges that you know produce high quality data. Um and uh if you're trading equities for example, right, and you're thinking about at what time an order arrives at the exchange,
[06:31:01] well, you can think about time seen from different locations because there's multiple multiple locations that you can look at the time of, you know, when an order arrives. And so there's this notion of collocations like different views of time for the same packet, right? Um and then again you know one layer deeper it's like where where do these packets you know how do they go from your machine when you press by apple to the exchange well this network path and you know knowledge of the network path is you know information
[06:31:34] about the network is available and so you can think about you know how the machine how the order starts from my machine arrives to the exchange there's another layer and additional data that you can bring to bear for the problem and then there's a matching ing that leaves on the on the machine exchange which is another layer of of information that you can extract and um you know thinking about this entire process you know order arrives and the at the machine on the exchange at different times then they queue up right
[06:32:07] and then they get processed one at a time and they get put into the order book and so the time in which the order receive you know the orders are received by the exchange machine is meaningful. the time at which they're processes no longer meaningful because you know it's just processing time in a queue right it's as fast as the as the matching engine can go uh on the machine at the exchange so you know there's a lot of layer I guess you know and um you know to be an informed trader you should probably think about these layers and uh and see what kind of data you can access
[06:32:42] you know if you are on Yahoo Finance you can definitely get you know the first two right for free mostly and then you data becomes expensive. Now, who are the players? Well, you know, one way to think about the players are in terms of the horizon um at which these players are making bets in terms of like, you know, future prices or or movement of prices. And so, you know, I think, you know, I be them just for illustrative purposes into like four levels. You have institutions like the bank, banks, pension funds, index
[06:33:15] funds, insurers, central banks. Those are like the elephants in the room, very slow, very steady. Um, their horizon is like years, right? Then there's like quantitative funds. They could do intraday, they could do months, but you know the slightly smaller, slightly less sophisticated fund funds. Um, um, they may not trade every day. They may have a specific strategy that triggers, you know, that is triggered on certain on certain events. Uh, but they're definitely try to beat the index, right? And if you look at retail investors, they kind of sit depending on
[06:33:48] how sophisticated they are in between, you know, these two horizons, right? Between month, two years and intraday to months. Then, you know, one layer faster than the systematic trading firms. I think you know Dshaw to Sigma and Rent are you know the historical big systematic trading firms and they will trade anything you know seconds, minutes, weeks. That's kind of like their mod operandi. And then you know one layer deeper there there's the high frequency trading firms that literally trade in microsconds to to milliseconds. Okay. And um
[06:34:24] you know one of the games that all these players play in particularly the faster players they try to to read slower players and find their fingerprints and you know build strategies around these fingerprints. uh and you know the pro professional players you know you could think about you know these quant fund systematic trading firms and HFT also adapt to what they see in the market right so if a strategy is no longer working or they continuously monitoring for new signals they may adapt to that signals that's very relevant for world models because it means that and I'll repeat this a few
[06:34:57] times once you learn a world model for the financial system and you start implementing policies based on that war model but the world model will change our feet right It's kind of like a reactive system. Now again, you know, there's two games, right? So the high frequency games where speed, speed, speed is kind of like the game. Uh these are the high frequency high frequency trading firms and uh they just want to fill orders that appear on the exchange and they provide liquidity to the markets, you know, often at the premium. And then the mid-frequency game which is
[06:35:32] like you know the slower players that that that we talked about. Um there's many rules to these games right to both games but in general. So the ru the exchange has some rules uh how orders are processed what kind of information you get back for an order and so on and so forth. uh FINRA you know has a set of regulations of things you can you cannot do you know the SEC and there's federal regulations and other things you know that you can and cannot do for example if you are a smaller fund you can decide um on different tax regimes right uh
[06:36:07] that will impact whether or not you can make money doing certain trades or not and then you know there's more and more rules um now these rules are kind of like invariant or unchangeable so if were to build a war model around, you know, the financial system, instead of learning the entire world model, you might need a hybrid architecture in which you can hardcode some rules that, you know, may change every now and then and may need an update to the architecture and then you can learn u you know the dynamic of like order flows on top of this immovable set
[06:36:42] of rules, right? You you don't have to to learn everything. Um I also added the slides because a lot of the things people think about in computer science, vision, robotics, they translate quite nicely the problems into into financial problems. There's learning the dynamics from the data. This would be dynamics of order flows. Um training in imagination there's like some very similar thread of literature there. There's always there's always a sim to real gap. You know you're you have a simulator or you have a world model in which you're testing your
[06:37:15] strategy. People call it a back testing um you know harness or you know back tester and then you know you paper trade you know you pretend that you're trading without buying or selling and then you actually trade in the market and as you go and you know act in the real world you know your model uh has some gaps and you know there's always you know what Janette was talking about yesterday um there's different decision horizons and you may use the models in different way at different decision horizons and I think Here is probably like my most important you know um point about
[06:37:51] the markets is like you know I love physics you know I'm a statistician and I used to model you know systems for the model is about physics and physics is amazing because it's very you know precise and we understand it pretty well and then I used to experiment on social systems and people are kind of a mess right and markets despite their highly regulated menmade objects projects they are still somewhat messy and in particular you know from a I guess you know research intellectual perspective
[06:38:23] what's exciting about the markets is like is a whole you know it's a game theory you know in real in real time all day long right or you know a few hours a day um and so counterpart is there study your order flow you know there's people who act on news and things they read on Reddit uh and um you know once you found, you know, once you think you've found a good representation for what's going on in the real world and you trade based on that representation, you know, three weeks, 3 months later, that representation starts to change. Okay?
[06:38:58] And so people call this alpha decay, meaning, you know, alpha is a, you know, a measure, a parameter that people use to measure uh whether you can beat an index. And uh you know if you find the pure alpha means you're finding a strategy that helps you beat the index. Well you know based on a particular word model that you um froze but then you know that alpha and the strategy will be no longer useful you know in the near future typically. Okay. And so these are we talked about this you know they're not stationary. Um
[06:39:32] the markets are not independent. So the person who is you know training a model well the data is fully observable but the intent which is really what you care about right in this game theoretic scenario is not observable right then and you know we saw um David Dono's talk on Monday prediction implies structure somewhat if you if you look at the structure in this latent space well really not here this the symmetry is always broken there's so many iosyncrasy in the data that you cannot really um assume that you learn the structure
[06:40:06] because you're good at predicting certain observables. Uh and you know realism does not imply validity. What I mean by that there's so many degrees of freedom that even if you have a model that kind of matches on a bunch of observables over time at different time scales. You know there's so many mechanistic models that they are compatible with all um you know we being able to match the observables. It's kind of hard to to assume that you understand anything if you can just, you know, have a realistic simulator. Uh you really
[06:40:39] have to have a mechanistic game theoretic model to, you know, to fully claim that you understand. Um and then, you know, you can't replay the market. You know, it happens once and it's gone, right? And so I guess I'm going to repeat that you know in order to model or to develop a world model for just such a system you want to hardcode stable aspects of the system like the exchange mechanics accounting identities lots of the rules and then learn the flow dynamics on top. Okay. Oops. I also wanted to add um you know somebody said
[06:41:15] in the last talk I think it was like Bradford student the data is scarce but there is enough data that you know even if you just live in academia there's a lot of research that you can do of course if you partner with an industry partner that has access to expensive data it can be a benefit but there's enough out there right that um that makes this fun there's order book data out there there's broad market and macro data out there there's simulators models and benchmarks Um, for example, if you go on Quampedia, there's like, you know, of course, every strategy you find out there, it's been published
[06:41:48] because it's wrong or not useful, but it'll give you a flavor of what, you know, people are trying to do. And there's code that that goes with a lot of the strategies. So, it's um and there's competitions and the competitions are based on real data and maybe, you know, that's where you can really try and evaluate any any good ideas that you might have. But there's a lot of there's a lot of out there. These are a few research directions since I've been asked to you know think about what I might want. I want a lot of things that are difficult and so equilibrium
[06:42:22] aware world models would be good or you know in my head the way I think about is like well we are never in an equilibrium although we know what the equilibrium should be but what we really want is a model that you know tells you you know how how the world goes from one equilibrium to the next to the next and so it's almost like you know dynamics in between equilibria that that you want to you want to stand this hybrid architecture. I really don't know um you know I have some thoughts but I don't know how how to implement it really
[06:42:56] right and this um you know just you know have you have the rules and you have the agents that learn fro so this abides for example stands for agentbased interactive um discrete event simulator and you know the agents are LLM agents there's a whole um ecosystem where you can play around with these with these um agents and you know it's one of the attempts that people have made to recreate the system and you have to decide on the mix
[06:43:29] of types of agents and so on and so forth but that's that's interesting. I'll have a couple of slides of references at the end. um you know evaluation I feel is one of the most interesting things that can come out of academia in this um in this you know space estimates you know you know I think in terms of potential outcomes and so how to translate a lot of the targets that people have in this literature in terms of potential outcomes every unit's treatment or action depends on every other unit's
[06:44:04] action across players in time and so you know we have spillovers we have total effects we have direct fat and you know there's a lot of this design of experiments and AB testing under alternative assumptions it's kind of relevant here and you know again design of experiments and you know there's uh all you know there's been natural experiments run by regulators that you can leverage you can do your own little experiments uh there's a lot of observational studies that you can run and Guess um this kind of my concluding
[06:44:38] slides you know what a nice success story that comes out of this community could be or could look like right um and I think of you know CASP this critical assessment of structure prediction if you're not familiar with it um is a community that you know around structure prediction that for 20 years developed data sets and benchmarks and competitions and eventually all that data was you know leveraged by Google deep mind into solving you know protein folding right and so you know I think
[06:45:12] here you know in this community if you're developing world models for financial markets or for the economy in general you know that's what we need right we need some you know hybrid architecture or some you know models that can accommodate all these complexities we need some tests right that we can run without you know necessarily having to do trading in order to decide whether these models are causal enough that we can you know believe they're good mental model good
[06:45:44] representations of the world and then we need benchmarks um and I think I think that's and I hope that that's what this community can offer I'll share the slides there's a couple of slides of references with all you know that you know can help you if you're just starting dig deeper that that's what I say thank All right. Thank you very much, Edido. Um, so next up we have Bayion Bruss from Capital One. Um, I'd say similar setup
[06:46:20] where we can let Bion go through his slides, ask any clarifying questions, and then, um, after him, we'll have, uh, one more presenter, and then we'll kick off the panel. There we go.
[06:49:56] And now I need to make it full screen. Nope. All right, we'll just do it this way unless I can Oh, enter slideshow. Go. Okay. All right. How's everybody doing? Uh, thanks for thanks for your patience
[06:50:30] there. Uh, I'm going to give a a similar talk to the one you just talked about. Um, and I know we've heard a fair bit about finance over the course of the day. Um, Oops. Why is it jumping ahead? It's got a mind of its own is playing. I know, but it won't stop playing. All right, we're just going to do this. No playing.
[06:51:08] Okay. Uh, so I'm going to talk a little bit about uh the difference between the kind of finance we've heard about so far and consumer finance. Does anybody know the difference off the top of your head? What what are we talking about when we're talking about consumer finance? >> Retail banking, credit cards, mortgages. This is probably the kind of finance that most of you interact with on your day-to-day lives. Uh, and most people do. um it's different from I think what we would call high finance that we've
[06:51:41] heard about uh previously but you know there's a lot of principles that sh are shared across them and you will hear you know you'll see some similarities in the slides that uh you know presented and what I'm presenting now but before I jump into world models and consumer finance I do like to start uh on a a slightly more philosophical note um because I feel like people who work in the AI research community don't spend a lot of I'm thinking about money in the way that we do. And um it's a very strange concept when you actually spend
[06:52:16] time thinking about it. It is it is really weird what it is. If I ever if I asked you to define it, you would have a hard time. And the truth is most academics have a hard time truly defining what money is. And there's a bunch of different answers to this question. Um, but I like this one because it kind of conveys the the weirdness of money. Uh, money is a system of mutual trust. It is the most universal and most efficient system of mutual trust ever design devised. And it is what creates this trust is a very complex and long-term network of
[06:52:49] political, social, economic relations. You believe that money exists because everyone around you believes that money exists. is something we've all agreed exists and we use to organize everything we do. Building buildings, buying food and it is a complete figment of our collective imaginations and it is reinforced by those very same systems. This is a very strange concept and so then we have this strange concept and we're asking ourselves how can we get AI to think about this very strange fiction that humans have come up with. Gets even stranger when you ask where
[06:53:24] does it come from? So maybe you can't define it, but how do we get it? And uh the answer is actually like much simpler than uh what you might imagine. There's no complex mechanism of where money comes from. We just make it up. A bank decides one day to give a loan and new money is created. That money didn't exist and now it's there. And that is exactly how money comes. That's that's where it comes from. It starts circulating. You take the money that the bank gives you. You buy something with it. You then create a job for the person that you buy with it. That person takes
[06:53:58] the money from their job, puts it back in the bank. Now that money is circulating in the economy, and money that didn't exist a day, a month, a year before is now there, and we all just kind of go about our business. It is a very strange thing. So, we have this this strange system where uh we can just create fictional entities and we can go about our lives and pretending like it doesn't exist. We want AI to interact with that system. Let's see. And despite uh its simplicity, it is
[06:54:32] incredibly high stakes, right? This thing that doesn't exist matters quite a lot. You know, at the local level, we all go about many many decisions based on money because it helps us build wealth through getting our mortgages and and investing in the market. It helps us smooth out cash flow. It helps us pay our bills. And you know there's some other negative potential local effects if you don't think about money in the right way, right? You have financial distress from over borrowing. Um that's at the local level. That's the kind of
[06:55:04] us as individuals. But then you actually start to look at macro effects. Um you know the creation of money through this kind of strange process I described uh creates liquidity. It allows the economy to grow. it it allows us to invest in you know another data center. Um and the downside risks are also pretty stupendous, right? We I think many all of us nobody here is so young that they were born after the financial crisis. I hope um but you know the financial the financial risks of uh doing this process
[06:55:38] wrong are pretty uh substantial and they can have you know effects on the economy, they can have effects on businesses and it can be um you know it's a tongue-in-cheek aside. is actually a really um important part of the functioning of society. And so then the question is how do we build a model of this thing? Um and you know there's there's a lot of different ways to go about thinking about this. Um but I just wanted to like
[06:56:13] first kind of think about what would a world model in consumer finance look like? So we have this notion of an economy which I didn't even describe. It itself is a a weird collective fiction. Um and it is completely unobservable. We you can't actually go out and look at the economy. I can't walk outside and say okay that's the economy or can't bump into the economy one day. It it doesn't exist. But it is made up of people and those people are all existing and those people are all doing things. Some of those things that they're doing are coordinated. Some of those things are independent. But we can't actually see what's inside
[06:56:46] all of those people that are participating in this economy. All we can see are what are the things they are doing. They're taking out loans. They're spending their money. They've got some income that they're bringing in and putting in their bank accounts. They're making payments. And so we can take all of that observable actions that those individuals in the economy are, we can aggregate that up and we can uh look backwards. And so a lot of the stuff we see in finance is really that it's just, you know, what was the uh average income over the last few months for American households? Those kinds of
[06:57:19] backward-looking things. That's not really a world model. That's just a summarization of the state of the economy in aggregate. What you really want is kind of a a model of the future. What is this economy going to do in the future? And the way you can do that is you can have a model at the individual level per person and you can roll that up into a model of the economy or you can kind of take those backward-looking aggregates and you can build models of each of those backward-looking aggregates. But either way, you're trying to ask, you know, how is this thing that I have
[06:57:52] this, you know, observation about going to evolve over time? And most importantly for financial institutions, how is it going to evolve over time under the actions that I take on that system? So what do you have to kind of build this world model? It's a consumer financial uh institution. You have payments, you know, all the card swipes that somebody makes, all the transfers that somebody makes. Uh it's actually quite a large amount of data. Um you have you know the spend you have all their digital activity across you know
[06:58:25] banking has become truly a digital uh uh thing at this point. Very few people still go into bank branches and so you have all their digital activity across you know your various mobile services and and and web services. You have information about their income such as their paychecks and deposits and their savings and investments. And so you have all this but mind you again this is all at the local level. This is per per person. And this is not at the quote unquote economy scale. And so what you really well what you can do or I think I think how you want to solve this problem is you want to model
[06:58:57] at the individual level of all of these different people. Um and you're trying to answer this you know kind of canonical world model question. How does this person's future behavior change under an action or an event that I can take as a financial institution? But it's not just it's not good enough to just predict that one person's future behavior under potential outcome or under a potential um uh intervention. You need to be able to in aggregate have good fidelity. So if you take all of the different people and all of your models of all of the different people and you
[06:59:30] aggregate it up, does that recover the macroeconomic dynamics that you know should exist um from all the years that we've studied um economics? And so that world model needs to be both right at the individual level. You need to have good individual person level predictions, but you also need to have kind of this global scale structural um uh validity. And to add some additional burdens onto this thing that's already very hard to do, it needs to be uh stable in a very
[07:00:05] long range. At least in consumer finance. Um we are you know many many decisions that we make you think about a mortgage for instance that is a decision that you're making I'm going to give you a massive sum of money that you are going to have 30 years to pay me back that is a time scale that machine learning doesn't typically think about you know when you think about the best models uh that we have today we're talking about couple seconds in the future maybe a few minutes 30 years not something that we typically think about
[07:00:39] in AI uh certainly not days we need to be able to support this kind of counterfactual reasoning I'll talk a little bit more about that uh we need to be able to incorporate outside knowledge kind of the the macro environment that affects those local individuals the policy changes and ideally it would be interpretable at a minimum it needs to be steerable so what are the challenges that we have in facing in building this kind of thing that I talked about. Um there's the kind of lowest level challenges on the
[07:01:15] representation on the data itself. It's a interesting mixture of tabular data, temporal data, um you know, semistructured uh information like the clickstream that I mentioned, fully unstructured data like uh written documents and so you need a you need a model that can kind of learn all of these particularly as those things represent the causal dynamics of an individual's behavior over time. Uh one of the other challenges is partially observable. We don't actually I mentioned this you have the economy you
[07:01:47] can't see that you have people you can't directly observe the insides of people so all you get is kind of uh a uh observation of of discrete uh behaviors that the person takes uh and so it's partially observable in that sense and that you can't see the full picture of an individual person. It's also partially observable in that no one financial institution can see all of the participants in the economy. We all have a subset of the total population. non-stationerity. I think we know what that is. We've heard a lot about it. Um I think the the interesting piece here
[07:02:20] is not only does the world change. Um but the environment itself, if the if you consider the environment to be the person that you are interacting with, they know that they are being interacted with. They know that they're being modeled and they change depending on what they think of your own uh beliefs about them and what they're and how they're being uh treated. And so the world changes on its own and also in reaction uh in reaction to what it thinks about you, which is not typically what we think about in world models. Um
[07:02:54] we need to be able to reason steerability. We need to be able to reason about future shifts in the environment itself and potential changes in the rules. So, one of the big differences about um uh finance is that there's no like physical laws. There's some things that we kind of loosely hold to be true, but one of the big challenges is that you want to be able to ask the question, if what I hold to be true is no longer true, how will that change? And so that's like a change in the structural structural dynamics of the environment itself. Not just the you
[07:03:28] know uh the the environment responding to an action. It's like what if the rules of the environment change completely? And then finally um evaluation. How do we know say you solved all these first four problems how do you even know if it's good? Uh that's kind of the hardest problem here. And so I you know we we have done work on the first four. I believe the first four are pretty tractable. we're not completely solved on the first four. I feel like the the last bullet here is the one that uh is the the most pressing challenge uh as we look at how do we have world models of
[07:04:00] consumer finance. And so when we look across the literature of world models, there's really all these different methodologies, there really only two ways to do it. There's reconstruction and there's taskbased evaluation. uh the all the reconstruction is I have some data uh up to a point and then I use my world model to generate some more data how much does the more data that I create look like the data that I actually have you know it's basically a reconstruction of of your world based on what it's seen up until that point and
[07:04:33] then task based is you have a world model you use that world model to train a policy you test the policy right that's you'll read through all the papers this is essentially the only two ways of doing um we can't really do reconstruction we could but it's not particularly useful. So we tend to focus on taskbased. So okay, so I have a policy trained in some way either by a world model or something else. Can I test that policy? Now most ways that we do that, not us, most ways that you'll see that done in
[07:05:07] either robotics or in video games is uh through a simulator, right? You have a policy and then you put that policy inside of a simulator. We unfortunately don't have the benefit of a simulator in consumer finance. Uh it would be nice but we don't and so we use back testing essentially. So you replay a historical tra trajectory of the environment and you swap in instead of the policy that was originally in the environment because every environment is shaped by some policy, right? Like all your data is conditioned on the decisions you made
[07:05:40] to collect the data. And so you swap out the policy that you had with a new policy and then you aggregate the realized outcomes along that trajectory into a score. And you can imagine what some of the challenges are that come from this. Um but one of the biggest ones is you have lots of data and none of the data that you care about. we have billions and billions of transactions or if you're you know doing orderbook data you have you know all of
[07:06:13] the different uh trades uh you know for decades across all of the different S&P 500 um you know stocks and the thing that you actually care about is the thing that comes right next but you only have one of those in that entire time period and so we have this really big challenge of very rare events are the things that we care the most about and they're the sparest thing in our data. Um the other so you might say okay well
[07:06:46] just synthesize more data or why not train more things on that one time snap. Um or you know why not you know incorporate the fact that you know that a time that a uh a financial crisis is coming into your model. And actually this is one of the big challenges you see for a lot of people when they start working on these these kinds of things in finances is actually the time travel problem where they either directly or indirectly take knowledge that they wouldn't have had at the time that they were making the decision and bake it into the model that they're using or bake it into the framework or bake it
[07:07:20] into the evaluation. Very very subtle choices that you make and how you do the evaluation end up make vastly inflating what you think the quality of your decisions are. Um but what ends up happening is what the model gets right in these what you evaluate it using back testing what it gets right you can only really trust it in a local scenario it can only be so far from the policy that you had you can't really explore um large counterfactual regions of the space and so this creates kind of the central
[07:07:53] problem and I think the problem that we haven't solved yet uh is this counterfactual problem you know this this back testing framework scores uh the policy using historical outcomes which assume that the state didn't change under the new policy. But that's exactly what we're trying to ask. We're trying to ask how does the state change under the new policy and you don't have a simulator because and if you had a simulator you could test whether or not you had a world model and vice versa. you end up in this circular loop where you say, "Well, if I had a good world model, I could simulate the economy and
[07:08:26] I could test any policy, but how do I know if my world model is good if I don't have a simulator and there's no way out of it?" There are, and it's not as bleak as it sounds. Uh, there are some ways uh that you can kind of break out of this paradigm. Um, and really what it boils down to is very careful and thoughtful data collection. You can go out and collect data outside of your existing policy. Um, you have to be thoughtful about it. you have to have done it years ago. You can't just do it today because a lot of this data takes a long time to mature. And once you've collected that data, then you can use
[07:08:59] that data to estimate the counterfactual effects of um of your of your new policies. So, uh I think I'm running out running low on time. Uh but the key takeaways here, money is strange and it's really important. uh the world model that we want in consumer finance has to be both right at the individual level and from a macrodnamics perspective. We have real challenges in representation, observability, non-stationity and steer steerability. They're tractable, but they are still large research
[07:09:34] challenges. And I think where I would love to see the most progress made is on evaluation. Um because it is still feels very circular to me whenever I think about how we get a world model in this space. Uh so please share ideas with me if you've got some. Uh you know, we've done a bunch of research. I can't publish anything directly on what we've built, but I can publish a lot on the things that are around the edges. So, these are all things that are done by myself or by team members or uh faculty that we work
[07:10:07] with on a number of the topics that I just mentioned. And I will finish uh by saying we're hiring research scientists, research engineers, and we have an internship program uh for applied researchers and AI engineers. So, Thank you, Bayion. Um, I got numerous text messages from Booth faculty that they liked your description of of money and uh that it would be fun to have you
[07:10:41] uh in the classroom. Um, so thank you. Uh, next up we have uh Nicole Kagan from Kalshi and she uh unfortunately got sick at the last minute but is uh toughing it out uh via Zoom and we'll give a slightly briefer talk and then we will dive into the panel. >> Great. Thank you so much for that introduction. Can everyone hear me? >> Okay, I'm hoping the answer to that question is yes.
[07:11:12] >> Yeah. Amazing. Okay, because I I was just there in stunned silence. Um, phenomenal. Uh, thank you so much for having me. I'm so sorry I couldn't make it all the way out to Chicago today. Uh, I was very sick this morning. Uh, I'm going to give a presentation. I don't have any slides because I think that, you know, uh, it's funny. I think the the slides that I've seen so far today very much remind me of grad school. Like there's a very particular format to presenting uh, economic slides. Uh, and as much as I love them, I figured that I might as well just have a chat with you and talk you through how we think about uh, world models uh, at Cali and how we feel like we participate in that
[07:11:44] ecosystem as well. And then if there are slides that are needed or that would be useful afterwards, I'm more than happy to send them through uh, in that style too. Um, so it's very nice to meet all of you. Again, thank you for having me here. Um, my name is Nicole. I'm the head of research here at Keli. Uh we are the world's largest prediction market and we are a fully CFTC regulated financial derivatives exchange. I'll get into that a little bit later. Um usually if I were in the room I'd ask you to put your hand up if you had ever heard of Cali, but that's a little bit less relevant now that I'm remote. We'll do something a little bit more interactive uh a little bit later. So I think to
[07:12:18] open the thing to note is this workshop of course is really focused on the discussion of what a world model is, right? And world models are at their core a system that takes some partially observed environment and then produces some compact updatable representation that's sufficient to predict what happens next in it. And what I want to argue today is that actually such a system already exists and it in fact exists at scale and it exists outside of any machine learning representation or neural network and uh most of you actually have probably heard a great
[07:12:49] deal about it. Uh today we heard a lot about financial markets and the speakers who came prior were speaking to you about different assets and how we might think about the projection of their their future patterns and returns uh and the systematic ways that we can begin to construct world models using the data that underly them. Um but fundamentally all of these things are forecasts right. Uh the thing with the forecast though that exists in contemporary financial markets especially the traditional public markets that we talk about when we talk about equity pricing is that in fact they're very noisy right uh a share price is a compound object. It prices a
[07:13:23] claim on some stream of uncertain future cash flows that are discounted by some rate that reflects risk preferences time value and then many other frictions that are all bundled together. And so in order to recover some clean probability estimate for any single well- definfined future proposition for a stock price uh actually requires unwinding all of that. And that process of decomposition can be really hard because there may be different things that influence stock prices or equity valuations at different points in time that makes them difficult to model and difficult to to make tractable uh for analysis. And of course
[07:13:57] that can be done uh and it's often done with some simplifying assumptions. But the price itself in in those situations is not the probability. There is however a class of instruments that we've built to solve that problem. Uh and those class of instruments are known as event contracts. Those event contracts are contracts on the outcome of a given event. So for instance uh what will the FOMC decision be in September at the upcoming meeting in a couple of weeks. And these contracts are constructed such that the price itself is a probability you know directly and by design. And I think that in this in
[07:14:30] this talk, what I want to argue is that that actually makes prediction markets the most direct empirical access we currently have to a naturally occurring world model. It's a system that estimates a full continuously updated and distributionally rich probability distribution over future states of the world that is produced by some mechanism that is external to any of the architecture that we've talked about in this conference so far. Right? And that's a claim that I want to substantiate. Before we get into that, I want to spend a minute just discussing what Kelsey is. So, uh, if everybody in the audience could go and pull out their phones right now and head to ky.com. Uh,
[07:15:03] I'm sure many of you in the room have heard about it. Maybe some use the platform, but I want to make sure that we're all kind of starting on the same page for what the platform does. Uh, hopefully the signal in the room is good enough to facilitate this, and I'm sure at booth it is. So, what you'll notice is that in fact, our platform has over 8,000 events live. Under those events, we have hundreds of thousands of markets live and running at any given point in time. And those allow you to create price discovery on a wide variety of different financial assets, right? And those range from your traditional equity price projections for your indices and for your broad-based indices for
[07:15:35] instance, right through to uh cultural events, entertainment events, right through to sports. uh and then of course covering traditional economic macroeconomic indicators uh and other in instruments that have been well well studied and are somewhat well understood and then perhaps most excitingly political decisions and election outcomes right and the reason I think that's important is because I think much of the value of being able to construct a world model is to understand the way that society is moving through time right and part of the way in which society is shaped is very much through the electoral frameworks that we set and then the people that we elect to make
[07:16:07] decisions on behalf of a given uh constituency And so I think to the extent that that is the case, it is very much valuable to site what we have available through our website. We're covering currently all house and senate races running throughout the US and a number of uh also international elections. And the reason that matters is because the current alternatives that we have that exist in the public domain. So things like polling actually run decently infrequently. They give you a snapshot estimate at a given point in time, but they don't provide this continuously updating distributional signal that I was mentioning earlier. And the reason
[07:16:41] for which that matters is that now that we have that kind of price discovery available and now that you're able to measure tick by tick or minute by minute how the prices are moving, you can also start to back calculate what is moving those prices at any given point in time. What seem to be the sentiments that are driving different market uh in market participants to act in different ways in those markets. And that's interesting because it starts to get at questions uh like you know what do people find credible in the way of information or perhaps less credible in the way of information? Does it matter if policy makers say something once? Does it
[07:17:13] matter more if they say it 15 times? That can give you some kind of enriched picture of how people are viewing the world and society around them. Cali is as I mentioned earlier a CFTC that is federally regulated designated contract market. It's actually the same regulatory category that uh currently governs the Chicago Merkantile Exchange. We were approved by the CFTC in November 2020. We've been operating since November uh since 2021. And prediction markets of course aren't new. They started in most substantial form with the Iowa electronic markets back in 1988. And they started really as
[07:17:46] an academic instrument. And that academic instrument was used to study these kinds of questions and particularly electoral questions at a really small scale. And we are in many ways that same instrument except we're operated at a scale that those original researchers didn't have access to. Right? So we have millions of resolve contracts across many different categories. And all of these are publicly documented through our open API. In fact, all of our data is free and totally accessible to researchers such as yourselves. And so if there are any research projects that you're interested in working with us on or working independently on, that data is there. And should you require anything
[07:18:19] else, you're welcome to reach out and contact me. Fundamentally, all of the instruments that we have on the platform, as you can see as you're scrolling through our markets, is what you would call an arrow to bro security, right? So, it's a contract that resolves against a single well-defined future proposition. And it's specified by some unambiguous rule that is fixed in advance and pays a fixed amount if the proposition is true and nothing otherwise. Said otherwise, you get $1 if you're correct about the outcome and $0 if you're incorrect about the outcome. You can trade in and out of your position as many times as you like throughout uh the contract's lifespan
[07:18:52] right through to the contract settlement and expiry. And our contracts trade continuously at a price between usually 1 cent and 99 cents. What I will say and what I think the property that is important here to highlight is is under a no arbitrage argument that number isn't just a probability. Uh in fact, if the market is functioning as intended, a contract priced at.7 cents is a live quantifiable uh sorry, a live quantitative falsifiable claim that the underlying proposition is 70% likely to be true. Whether that claim then survives
[07:19:24] empirical scrutiny is is a question I want to discuss with you next. So the general appeal of prediction markets as I painted them so far is this notion that you can effectively take these prices and then ingest them as genuine prob probabilistic forecasts of the future. And that's all well and good except it's just a claim before you substantiate it with any kind of evidence. So what we did on our research team is we actually drew out all of these observations. We took 2.2 million observations across the 5 years that the exchange had existed. What we basically found is actually yes, like our markets
[07:19:57] are extremely well calibrated and they f they follow proper scoring conventions that do minimize loss. Um and and in fact that they're not bound just by the loss functions that you would see in traditional machine learning literature, but in fact they're bounded by this arbitrage condition, right? where if a market's implied probability of something, you know, going yes, a certain person winning an election seems to be inconsistent with its implied probability uh or of some logically related proposition, then that inconsistency would would constitute some kind of extractable profit and extracting that profit would collapse
[07:20:30] that inconsistency. That's all to say, if you detect some kind of mispricing in the market, either on an individual strike or between strikes or between markets, you have every financial incentive to go and correct that mispricing. And what makes it really interesting on our platform relative to public financial markets is that the directness of the questions that we're asking. So compared to something even like Fed funds futures, we're not taking an average of say a month of interest rates. We're we're asking, you know, after this meeting, what will the interest rate be? Who specifically will descent at the next meeting? How many
[07:21:04] people are going to descent at the next meeting? How many meetings are there going to be next year? This granular breaking down of questions allows us to construct richer models of the world around us and to get it different kinds of pictures of what our traders are imagining the world to look like. And across a larger end sample, you can kind of get it a reasonable estimate of what that looks like many months out from the contract resolution. and a very low cost because for us the marginal cost of listing a new contract is approximately zero. But for running something like a study or polling or or doing extrinsic data collection can be very expensive um
[07:21:38] and both laborious in the way of time but then also in terms of the financial costs that it imposes. The other thing is um the fundamental incentive construction of the markets that we have on our platform matters. Right? So if you imagine a market where you have self-interested participants, they in fact have a reason to converge on the correct probability rather than something that is arbitrarily biased, right? And this is the key differentiator between something like a prediction market and something like polling. So in a world where you have polling or you ask people how they will view a state of the world or what they think is going to happen in future, they
[07:22:11] might tell you what they think you want to hear or what they idealistically would love to happen. What they're unlikely to tell you, however, is what the thing is that they think will actually happen. And that I think is a key point of difference between the two. Because we have people on our platform that are financially incentivized to make sure that the outcome that they're gearing their trades towards is the correct outcome. We get excellent calibration on the other side given that there's a forcing function that exists that is actually endogenous to the construction of the markets that we have on our platform and applies symmetrically across all of the markets
[07:22:43] that we have live. So the idea here is that uh you know and there are proper scoring rules that show this you know a market position that you take is a trade uh on the outcome of that market and if you mispric that i.e. If you report something that is different to your true belief uh under some general conditions is actually probably quite a costly strategy relative to reporting this honestly and that serves as a theoretical bridge between the idea that markets aggregate information which is what the speakers earlier were talking about uh as some kind of intuition and then market price
[07:23:18] calibration which is what I'm getting to now. It is difficult also in public financial markets to figure out what correct calibration looks like. You know, we were talking about counterfactuals and how you paint them and how you paint different states of the world earlier when we were talking uh when some of the other panelists here were talking. And I think that the big thing to note is like, you know, it's really difficult to know if Tesla's share price should be, for example, $500 or $600. It's difficult to know what a somewhat arbitrary PE multiple should be. What is less difficult to know though is what a Fed decision should be next month, right, in expectation. And
[07:23:50] in so doing and in so asking more direct questions, you're actually able to construct, you know, in a in some way a better estimate of what is going to happen in future because you're not necessarily uh unbounded in your ability to estimate. And what I mean by that is it's not the case for instance that you have some arbitrary dynamic that may influence through noise your expectation of some outcome. In fact, you might expect that uh you have a much cleaner way of accessing that outcome through a platform like Cali. And what I'll say is like you know this is not a pitch to trade on Kali. Like that's phenomenal obviously but the idea is that most
[07:24:24] people that come to Kaly in fact never trade. About 75% of the people that come to our platform are really just there to look at the outcomes. And the reason why they come to look at our outcomes is because we would call them well-c calibrated. And what I mean by that is there was a study that I was just mentioning earlier. And the idea is uh we completed what to our knowledge is the first calibration study that's ever been conducted on the complete resolved history of our regulated exchange or in fact of any US regulated exchange. We covered over 2.2 million markets. We spend the full operating history of the
[07:24:56] platform from 2021 through 2026. And I won't present the study in full. In fact, you can find that at calgy.com/ressearch. Um and of course it's a separate exercise. But there are a few results that I think are worth highlighting. The first thing is uh in aggregate the idea that these markets are well calibrated. So the idea that they have information value holds and in fact improves as resolution approaches and resolution in this uh case when I'm discussing it has to do with market settlement. If you pull all of our markets together, you'll find that the brier score declines from about 0.08 at a 3-month horizon to
[07:25:30] approximately 0.02 at market close. And that's against a benchmark that is typically used in the calibration literature of 0.25. 25 for some kind of uninformative coin flip forecaster. If you take the reliability diagrams, so if you plot observed outcome frequency against some uh implied probability, you can find that it actually tracks the 45 degree line that you would paint if you were a perfect Oracle forecaster very very closely. And so what we can say from the work that we've done is that when you see a contract that is priced at.7, it actually resolves affirmatively at a rate that's pretty consistent with
[07:26:03] that 70% across categories, not just in select categories. And that calibration is something that improves systematically and in fact near monotonically with the depth of the market participation. Right? So both in terms of the trade volume and the number of unique traders. And this is the idea of the wisdom of the crowd. The more people that you pull together, the better the outcome or the more approximate the outcome. uh in in expectation or in estimate to the realized outcome. But one thing we do find that is actually kind of surprising is like you know for a long time it was assumed and it was assumed by institutions in particular that you
[07:26:35] would need tens of millions of dollars on a market to get at some plausible um outcome that could be trusted. But in fact, what we find is that markets that have approximately above $10,000 in volume uh at the event level actually still are very well calibrated, still achieve a calibration rating or a brier score of about 01 or lower. And 0.1 for context would put you up with the best forecasting models across fields like meteorology that the world has seen. And so the other thing that we're building alongside of of course the the derivatives exchange that we run is this
[07:27:08] really well-c calibrated forecasting engine that is able to serve as a reasonable input or another data stream to projects like the ones that we've been talking about at this conference earlier. And so the idea here is that when you have you know a diverse information set you actually are able to sharpen that resulting estimate but that it doesn't actually take that many participants or that much money to reach a point of inflection or I guess reach a plateau rather is is a better way of describing it. And finally, of course, you know, you begin to see different dynamics in the way that different categories are calibrated. And we were speaking earlier about how, you know, you can't remodel, reconstruct the world
[07:27:41] in a way that would be useful because you don't have the benefit of running the counterfactual. Also, what we can get at with our markets and particularly the conditional construction of some of our markets is you can get at some reasonable probabilistic estimate of what people think would happen in different states of the world that is not a survey, right? And in that way it exists almost as a unique estimate of the way that people are projecting future outcomes. So for instance you know if this person wins will this policy pass. You can imagine that there might be different versions of the world that would eventuate given a a a winner in those cases. Uh and what I would say is that category that categorical
[07:28:16] variance is also interesting because it tells you a lot about the way that information is revealed that is informative for also studies in the computer science and machine learning literature. So for instance, a lot is known about economics or about financial outcomes some time in advance. You know, there's a lot of discussion of u FOMC meetings and the directions that they might take from a wide variety of different parties. But different areas like you know what somebody might say in a speech like what Trump might say in a speech and how that might influence market outcomes is often revealed much closer to the day much and perhaps even during the speech itself with active
[07:28:49] context. And so there's a little bit of qualification that you can add to the work that you're doing by correctly positioning uh in time when you think the information is revealed and what you think the process of information transition look transmission rather looks like. I think the thing that I want to end on because I want to make sure that we have enough time for the panel and apologies for coughing. I'm still a little bit sick. is um you know prediction markets are very interesting you know and they're particularly interesting in this field. I would say that had this been, you
[07:29:21] know, a discussion 3 years ago, perhaps we wouldn't be at the table. But I think now that we have millions of users and many records of trading activity and the way that individuals and groups trade across a wide variety of different markets and what the the calibration of those markets look like look like uh in the end is that we can say that prediction markets are effectively some kind of distributed mechanism that produces calibrated estimates of a probability distribution across different states of the world that we can verify using our own data. over two million resolved instances, but that we would also expect to move through to improve through time as we gain users,
[07:29:53] we list more markets, we get more granular with the questions that we ask to be able to get at more granular insights at the things that people actually care about. I don't think that that necessarily means that prediction markets are in and of themselves a substitute for any of the world models that we've been discussing over the course of this workshop. But I do think that it makes calcies resolved market history some kind of uh underuse resource. You know, it's a real-time adjudicated and incentive discipline data set against which forecasting competence of any learned world model is able to be directly benchmarked benchmarked sorry. And I think that's a
[07:30:26] collaboration that I want to end this speech on with a proposition of you know if anybody here is interested in combining their work on world models with what we have in terms of data sets of actual resolution uh across any of our markets and or has any ideas for markets that we could list. You know, I started this speech by saying that I lead research at Cali, and that's true. But I actually started at Kali on the markets team writing the contracts that we self-certify with the CFTC that become the full rules for all of our markets. To the extent that anybody is interested in listing markets on certain questions or listing conditional markets
[07:30:58] or has ideas for new market structures that would make it more empirically useful for the research that they're doing, I would love to hear from you. Please feel free to email me or find me through other platforms because we'd be more than willing to collaborate. We're still a a reasonably new research division. We have an extremely broad mandate and I think that there's a lot of room to cover here. Hopefully we'll have more content across the big machine learning conferences to come over you know the rest of this year and into next year that start to use the predictive power of our markets in the evaluation and benchmarking of world models and world model uh world modeling systems
[07:31:31] but also that independently are able to generate our own estimates as well of where we think we're going to go as a society in future. Thank you so much. All right. Thank you, Nicole. Um, so yeah, let's bring uh Bayan and and Ido up front. Um, I'll join you all here. I have a few questions to sort of kick off uh discussion and then uh we can let uh everything sort of evolve naturally and uh everybody in the audience feel free to ask questions as well. Um so one of
[07:32:07] the the things that I've been thinking about this this whole workshop is uh the very fact that you know if you go out and have a robotic simulator you run things over and over and again and it that environment is not you know dynamically evolving against you in the sense that the mutual information between you know a state today and the state tomorrow is not decaying like it would be in a financial market. Um and so given the challenges there of trying to model markets, should we maybe start with something that is more predictable
[07:32:40] like maybe modeling the consumers like a world model of consumers that we then aggregate up into maybe a broader u you know model of markets? How how do you think about that? Um like what's the most fruitful path if we want to take everything that we've learned about world world models the past you know 24 hours uh and start applying it to this domain. You had eight levels of of data depth. >> Which one do you think is the is the most tractable? >> No, I think I was having conversations at lunch and before the panel and in my
[07:33:14] view like micro micro macroeconomics or like you know the economy in general as much as it is still very unpredictable is um better understood, right? And so and the players at that level are you know institutional bound by you know rules and they are slower moving and I feel like a world model of the economy as the bedrock on which building you know first maybe consumer model which are super difficult but you know maybe maybe slightly you know actually I don't
[07:33:49] know because humans are crazy. Yeah. So I would say you know microeconomic models or a model of the economy is where I would start and actually I'm very interested in doing that myself but >> I think um I mean obviously I'm very interested in a model of consumer behavior because have a lot of data about it and it's fairly granular. Um and I think you can then recover the macroeconomics from that. Um I you know one of the big differences between
[07:34:24] consumer behavior and kind of the multi-party behavior of markets is that there's no adverse there's like a small amount of adversarial behavior. You know fraud is a is an example of that but it's such a tiny fraction of the overall interactions that you don't you have to account for it but you don't have to like explicitly model the adversarial behavior. Um and so it it moves much much more stably than than markets do. and and changes much less dynamically. So I I think in terms of like where we will plausibly have a a a world model, I
[07:34:57] think consumer finance is definitely one where we will have it in the next few years. Will that be useful outside of it? I certainly think so because I think a lot of if you can build a macroeconomic model from the consumer behavior, then you can use that to inform, you know, investment decisions, trading decisions, right? Like a lot of that stuff then feeds into strategies that you might have. So it could be useful outside of consumer finance. >> Actually have a question for Bayern if I may. Yeah. So you know when I studied the economics there was like microeconomics by Halvarian. There was the book. Yeah.
[07:35:30] >> There was Stiglets was like the microeconomic books and there was like Baros and other people who were trying to marry microeconomic behavior to macroeconomic aggregates which is something that you spoke about in your talk and what you you need to do to have a war model of consumer behavior. have you solved that kind you know I know that in in in economics they've made progress and you know made a solution but you know in your particular domain do you feel like you have that figured out or is that a challenge or >> I think we haven't explicitly sought to
[07:36:04] to solve it I'm not an economist um my sense is that a lot of those problems canonically were set up in like very small data regimes where you have like not a lot of information about how individuals interact with money and the decisions that they make on the micro level and you certainly don't have a ton of macroeconomic data you know probably when those books were being yeah like quarterly GDP numbers like about the what you had >> you know um
[07:36:35] >> and now we just operate in a completely different regime where you know I we have hundreds of millions of uh of consumers like spending money on their on their credit cards making payments doing all these things and I think uh my answer is like at least on the micro level we don't need to have explicit models of it we learn the behavior directly I don't think it's uh it's useful you can use those microeconomic models as like a way to test the validity of what you've learned perhaps uh but not you don't necessarily need to encode them in the models themselves and then at the macro I think it's the same
[07:37:07] thing is you aggregate up your what your your consumer level or individual level models are saying into the macro and then you say okay Does this fit with the kinds of kind of theoretical frameworks that we've built up over the years or not? And then you can also ask a question like are theoretical frameworks broken like that also might be true. >> Thanks. >> Yeah. >> Oh, >> uh great. So, uh I have a quick question. So, thanks for the presentations. Um so coming from uh computer vision world modeling or self-s
[07:37:44] supervised learning right we have this uh imaget benchmark and if you tell me you get 75% on imaget 1k I'm like okay you learn something from the data so for you uh what is your version of Imageet 1k like what do I need to show you to convince you that I have a world model that that works I this is an area that uh is I'm just going to admit like it's not great. There's not an imageet
[07:38:17] equivalent. Um we tried to release uh actually was is similar to the simulating health behavior um Alexandra was was talking about. We released a a a simulated financial behavior benchmark called personal ledger where we start with all of these you know u Nvidia released a 100,000 personas that they had like uh sampled they had kind of made sure that it was uh roughly matched the uh the distribution of the US census in in time and and income and all of these things.
[07:38:49] So there's all these personas. We use those personas to give to an LLM to generate a bunch of financial transactions that were grounded in each of these personas so that you get a rough sample of the US population accordingly. What we found is um getting that like the simul the synthetic data generation itself to have like good longitudinal behavior uh was it you know still a big challenge. I would say uh the better way to do it was if we can agree on what that like data should have in it. I would first start by asking uh
[07:39:24] you know uh academics like yourself to like build those data sets that has the set of properties in it that we want and then once we have that then we can say okay this is the data set that is the imageet data set. I don't think you're going to find real data out there in this space. So, it's going to have to be some kind of uh well-grounded synthetic data, but as long as it's like strong enough, we can start working with that. >> So, I agree there's no benchmarks even in, you know, the products I work with. And I think both of us ended up with the
[07:39:57] slides saying we need benchmarks, right? And some of the references I pointed to like this um agent-based framework, you know, they develop or they allow you to develop a sandbox in which you have agents for which you make assumptions about their intentions, right? And then you see the observable and you play like you know what would happen on exchange or multiple exchanges and I think you could use those simulations. I agree with you to build benchmark data sets in which you do have the intentions but you
[07:40:29] you know purposely assume that you don't see them right and then you see the observer that you would see on an exchange I feel like that is you that would be a good way to build benchmarks that then you could use to say oh does my war model get a mental model of the world in which you know some of the abstraction are correlated with the intentions that are also in observables but now I have the ground truth because I simulated the entire our system. So that's that's how I would start >> and and just following up on that. So uh again in computer vision right it's
[07:41:03] quite easy uh to get data you can get on YouTube Google image whatever you can scribe the internet and you can build whatever you want you have simulators but uh for people not in the financial you know side of things uh do you know if there is any like good resource to know where to get data or to build a benchmark that makes sense because this could be very misalign between academics and that each company values in a benchmark. So I feel if we try to build a benchmark randomly the chance that it
[07:41:38] will align with any one of you is near zero right. Uh so yeah that do you know what could be the bridge between those two things? >> I mean I can point you to resources like you know I had the slide and there's references there. There are resources out there with actual data uh or we code to build this simulated sandbox environment and then you know like also Ralph gave a talk and you know if you look at his you know um bibliography he has many many papers in which you know
[07:42:12] if you map you know there's like a lot of data sets are like free or you can get the license through an institution and then some data sets may cost you know $1,000 up to $15,000 and typically academic institutions will give you a little grant to buy the money makes available to all the faculty and then you know the next step at least in my world is like millions of dollars and then you have to work you know for a financial institution right yeah but but you know to build believable useful benchmark for everybody you don't need like this very expensive data sets I
[07:42:46] believe >> I I will offer myself if you want to build the benchmark I will work with you to figure out what it needs to have I think that's something that's useful for to the community. Um, I think we can't release our data, but I will tell you what what the the benchmark needs to have for if it's going to unlock more research. >> Yeah. Thanks. Um, so we have another question. If you have more questions, just come up to the mics and sort of queue up. Um, yeah. >> Hi. Um, hi V. Really nice, very such an honor to be hearing from you today. So,
[07:43:18] my name is Maggie. Um and then I have a question regarding to the steerability that challenge you've mentioned. So I'm very curious. You said steerability is a quite a challenge right now. Does it mean that when you are training AI systems like for reasoning about implications behind the data? Do you assume that everything has a underlying reason or how could you differentiate versus something? Sometimes not everything has a reason. So how do you differentiate when you're training the
[07:43:50] model? >> So there's there's two different things that you need in the system, right? You need to know why your policy took the action that it took and um you know we look at a a bunch of different mechanisms for doing that. Uh some of that is complicated things like sparse autoenccoders or you know some of those less complicated things like um doing something like a swap analysis where you just compare the two uh policies and you see where did those policies disagree
[07:44:23] and then you look at what are the characteristics about the the two places where they disagreed and then that gives you a sense of like what those two policies were using uh independently of each other. Um so that's on the like why did I take an action or why did this kind of system take an action and then the the other piece of it is why is the environment changing in a specific way is it you know and when I say environment I mean like the consu the individual consumer you know what is it that they're responding to either is that thing that they're responding to uh our actions as a company or is it
[07:44:58] something that's happening outside of you know the the space of data that we collect. Is it exogenous to that? Um, and so those are kind of the the why questions. And then what do you do about it is like I think really where the open where we still have like some open questions like once you know that how do you change um how do you change what you're what you're trying to accomplish? Now the other piece of steerability that I was mentioning is you don't want to just be able to steer your agent or whatever the policy is. Um, when you run the simula, once you
[07:45:32] have the system that can do the simulator, you want to be able to change the environment itself. So, you want to be able to ask, did the, you know, how would my policy operate under a financial crisis? How would my policy operate under GDP rips and goes to 16% per year because AI is making everybody so much money, right? Like those are the kinds of scenarios that you're going to want to be able to answer. And those aren't necessarily about your policy. Those are about changes in the dynamics of the environment itself. >> Thank you. Hi, thank you for a great presentation. Um, really insightful. Quick question
[07:46:06] might be really basic. Um, have you played around with Kumo RFM like those relational foundational models that understand time and relationships and could you like share some information on that? >> Kumo RFM for those who don't know is um there's like two different ways to model uh these kinds of there's a bunch of different ways to model these kinds of things. Um I would say the the dominant is using a sequential transformer. So you take all your behavior and you line it up in a in a time based on a time axis. Um a relational based model like
[07:46:40] Kumar RFM kind of keeps everything in data in its original data structure and assumes that every like tab table of data has like a join key within it and treats it like a giant graph over all possible join keys and relationships inside of your data. ecosystem. Um I we haven't experimented explicitly with Kumar FM but we've done a ton of work on graph machine learning. Um and I think what we find primarily is where the signal is heavily relational which tends to be in fraud. um it's very
[07:47:15] beneficial, right? Uh you can imagine that you know collaboration networks of people committing fraud or money laundering a model like that can really pull it forward. But where the when the signal is primarily like the self-reference of what the person themselves are doing over time, it's less impactful to have that kind of cross um person relationship in the model. And so I think my take is to have the broadest impact you probably want to start with the single view and then if you have narrower specifications for
[07:47:49] like fraud domains or moneyaundering domains then you start to look at the the graph uh based approaches. Uh question for Nicole. So you know it sounds like you have a large user base that uh simply comes to Kalshi to observe the events or observe the probabilities. Do you have a sense of um you know the implications of observing those probabilities? How are they changing society? Like how are people coming to the markets and looking at
[07:48:21] those probabilities and actually making a decision that's different uh than if the market did not exist? >> Uh you know it's an interesting question. I think we offer many different markets and what I would say is like, you know, we're talking about the order of millions of people, right? Different people are informing different decisions in different ways, but I will say, you know, if you took our markets on the Fed funds rate at the last decision, and you actually compared them to what CME had uh in terms of their Fed funds rate projections, you'll actually notice that Cali markets were closer to the correct result in the end, right? They had seemingly less of a deviation
[07:48:54] or a departure from what eventually happened. So what we're seeing and what uh you know some institutions have picked up on is these signals come through early. They repric very quickly and they tend to be better than consensus estimates in predicting what's going to happen at least on macroeconomic variables right and particularly in the cases of things like fed funds particularly in the case of things like inflation and certainly not worse for things like non-farm payrolls which are subject to significant revision. So to answer that question like yes I'm sure that people do alter their decision-m on the basis of what they see on Cali. ly how they do that probably varies by person. But you know
[07:49:28] to me it's just another stream of information that's coming in right in the same way that you would assess you know what's going to happen in an election through polling you can now look at polling you could look at the county estimates and potentially most interestingly you could see where they diverge most significantly to see you know when is the county market picking something up that perhaps a polling agency or authority is not picking up. We kind of saw this in the Mandani case, like you saw this momentum be picked up by markets much much sooner than polling was picking it up. And so you could get this very early leading signal. It's the same with some of our weather markets as a leading signal for uh you know foot
[07:50:02] traffic that is going to be impacted by adverse weather events. There are lots of different ways that it can source that it can serve as a supplementary form of information. It's a good question. >> So there's a question for Nicole. Thank you for your presentation. I thought it was uh very interesting. Um I was skimming through that research report that you mentioned and um you know you said that there's that past like about $10,000. Uh the buyer score uh is impressive but even beyond that um you see that the buyer score declines uh
[07:50:36] monotonically with um increased volume. Um and at the same time like I think it's um pretty open knowledge that uh the vast majority of prediction markets are by volume like primarily sports betting markets. Um how do you think about attracting more volume to more economically meaningful uh event contracts? >> You know I I would push back on the idea that sports is not economically meaningful, right? Like think about the way that people were captivated by the World Cup. Like I think over a billion people actually ended up watching the stream. We were talking about millions if not billions in partnerships through
[07:51:09] sponsors. You know, my view on this has always effectively been some version of I used to work at a hedge fund. Uh and you know, you'd wear a suit and like you'd come in and and you'd think about where short rates would be, where interest rates would be in 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, a year, you know, and you go home and you think that what you do is like very official because you dress up to be there. You use like long complicated jargon. Uh you know, and the reality is like when I was a, you know, a hedge fund researcher, did I know anything about short rates? Like maybe a little bit more than the average person, but like not really. Was it my passion in life? Like not really, you know? And
[07:51:41] then you go to somebody who has followed a national sports team for the last 28 years worth of World Cups. They know every player, every manager, you know, every deal that team has ever done. You're telling me that they're less informed and the decisions that they're making are less economically significantly. I just think that's kind of strange uh in the way that we view the world today. And I think maybe if people wore suits, it would be a little bit different uh in the way that they're perceived in sporting games. But the idea that you're getting at is like it is true that a lot of the volume that is transacted on the platform is sports related and to some extent that's unsurprising because what tends to be traded the most tends to follow where
[07:52:14] the attention is at any given point in time. Right? So you can see hundreds of millions of dollars placed on something like uh or traded on something like uh who the next Fed governor is going to be or who the next Fed chair is going to be when that's relevant. Well, with midterm elections coming up with transaction already over half a billion dollars in volume. And so, you know, the idea that sporting events would attract attention is not surprising given that they do attract attention in reality. You know, people tune in, they happen multiple times a week. And so, there is always a lot of content in the way that there is not for an election that might happen once every four years. But if the
[07:52:47] question is like, you know, how do you draw people into other categories, I think we are seeing some growth, especially in like economics and cryptocurrencies. is we're seeing some growth in our weather markets uh in our corporate KPIs actually which I think are really interesting and very clean ways to get at you know what noisy public equity markets uh in a way kind of obiscate they're often the things that analysts have a direct view on and now they're directly tradable through our platform so I think you know through time you'll probably see some natural movement as you see more institutions come to the platform and trade things that are closer to home for them so things like macroeconomic indicators and you see that use case from more
[07:53:20] institutional investors um but I would expect, you know, for the product offering to be pretty expensive and highly diversified. And I think to the extent that people are interested in something, you know, it's not really up to me where to direct volume. And if people want to trade on things like sports, they should be able to do that, too. >> Thank you. >> Hi, this question is for Nicole as well. So I'm one of the folks that you were mentioned who checks khi from a purely likeformational perspective and that's quite common in a lot of my friend group
[07:53:52] as well. We look at the news and we look at khi and then we come to our final conclusion or like specific conclusion. So with my question to you uh is basically that do you see something like college become the primary source of news and information rather than it being like a supplemental source of information in the long run? >> That's such an interesting question. Um you know I hope that more people come to KI and you know receive some information about the world around them from KI. I don't think that we're necessarily ever aiming to replace news or reporting the
[07:54:26] way that it exists. At the end of the day, many of our markets will resolve on the way that things are reported or who they're reported by. So, I just think that like, you know, in the broad tapestry of the ecosystem, prediction markets sit to me as a credibility layer on top of what is reported. Like, in the political sphere, the climate is very noisy. You hear lots of different things from lots of different people. Somebody will drop out, won't drop out, will pass a policy, won't pass a policy, might pass a policy, said something about a policy. And the question is like, well, how are you supposed to price that? And the answer is you could look at the Cali market to see and to get that price discovery. So that's where I think it serves as a complement to the
[07:54:58] traditional channels for news. But I'd be kind of interested to hear the other panelists views on this because especially in the more traditional macroeconomic space, I'm I'm not sure how people are thinking about it most concretely outside of the exposure that I have to the institutions that we speak to. >> Thank you. I mean, I think the the answer is any place where people are putting money on the line is a much better signal than when they're saying something that has no financial consequence to them. And so I'm not as familiar with I mean I know what Kouchi is obviously. I don't
[07:55:32] know it as a news source. Uh but I suspect that because there is, you know, financial uh incentives that force people to actually like really think about the choices they're making, it it's probably a cleaner signal than say Twitter where a lot of people get their news still today. Unfortunately, where there's where there's absolutely no cost to whatever you say being wrong or right. >> Yeah. Guess from my perspective, Ky Kali is another federally regulated exchange. So you know you know that's all I
[07:56:07] >> uh yeah so thank you for the panel. Um my question is a little bit more about like a policy in the AI usage because there you know for recent countries like EU now we have like watermarking AI models some industries are more regulated on the use of AI others not so much. So what do you observe in your uh settings and where do you think uh things might go? Yeah. >> Didn't Could you repeat the question? I'm sorry.
[07:56:38] >> Yeah. About the use of AI like how regulated is it in your settings about like safety and water marking? Like what do you observe in the use of AI in your specific settings? Like some settings are way more regulated than others. some countries are more regulated than others. So, how does that affect your work and how do you think it will affect in the long run? >> So, we're primarily US-based, but we have some international presence. Um, the consumer banking in the United
[07:57:12] States is probably one of the most regulated consumer banking uh uh markets in the world. Um, for good reason. Um, and you know, I think the interesting uh effect of that is that there isn't a lot of incremental AI regulation because much of it falls within the existing regulatory frameworks that we have for how we make lending decisions. How do we treat our customers? And so the real um challenge and opportunity for for most
[07:57:45] financial institutions is to how to advance the tech the use of this technology within the frameworks that we've been given and and we know how to apply um pretty well I think um and so you know there's obviously always a question of will the regulatory regime change um under you know this this new technology but as far as it has happened so far it hasn't shifted dramatically. Yeah, I guess you know also I am not close to execution so I can give you a partially informed opinion right but uh
[07:58:20] this uh fully systematic trading firms like you know Renee and Daw and Two Sigma have been trading you know using fully automated algorithms since the 80s right and the 90s and so there's not any additional regulations the market very very sorry the federal regulation covers so many aspects of it and you know whether you know the algorithm is you know I'm also a statistician so for me AI is just a big statistical system that has been
[07:58:53] trained on data so I don't really see much of a difference but to answer your question I don't think there's an additional AI specific regulations that come into play for now >> thank you that's a that's a contrast with healthcare here that we're seeing now. Yeah. Thank you. >> Hi, thank you for the interesting talks. Um I'm more of a pessimist I guess for the building world models for the economy. So maybe you can convince me
[07:59:26] otherwise. And I have two two thoughts specifically like one is related to the Lucas critic, right? that that says that past data cannot predict future data because everything has been taken into account especially for public policy, right? For images and videos, it's it's fine, but the economy constantly changes. Like as an example, the economy right now is driven by demographics to to a large degree. The boomer generation and all that, it's a major force behind the the current economy, but this might not be relevant in in 10 years. So they
[07:59:59] will be completely changed. Uh so that's one part and the other part is that through your talks I I feel that you presented economy as a as a sandbox but there's now a lot of mature economic work that says that culture is also important um uh like Joel Moir's work uh on culture and economic growth for instance right that the way we view ourselves and each others matters on the kinds of economic institutions that we build and culture constantly changes Even religion
[08:00:32] matters like how you so there's a metaphysical component to how the economy works. It's not like a closed uh sandbox. It's not completely deterministic. There's something metaphysical about it and that's something that's also very hard to predict. So these two things uh I won't let if you have any any thoughts about it. Um maybe you can convince me otherwise that these are all predictable. >> Well, I'm not going to convince these are all predictable. Okay, Panos. But I would say think about in a robotics simulation, right? you have a a completely computerized environment, right, in
[08:01:06] which you develop a policy of what the robot should do to pick up like the you know an egg and put it on a plate and then when you develop the deploy it in the real world well there's a sensors and sensors are faulty you know like the environment is not as controlled is in the computerized system so there's additional noise right and so the way I think about it you know in my small little sliver of the world is like well I can create a sandbox environment where I have you know different types of institution trading people in retail you know and professionals trading and this and that and that's my fully
[08:01:38] computerized sandbox and I can create a world model for that and then when I deploy it well you know there's going to be multiple layers of uh issues including the fact that you know the moment I deploy it and other people see what I'm doing you know the whole you know as the you know some regularities that they assume wouldn't change now do change, right? But, you know, from an intellectual curiosity perspective, I'm not going to be stopped by the fact that there's some extra noise, right? I'm still going to try and it's going to be
[08:02:10] fun. And I think it's going to be a question of how much does the noise that I encounter in the world is going to matter. Now, for >> if you're doing, you know, trading, well, unfortunately, the signal to noise ratio is already low. So, maybe it's going to be hopeless, but, you know, I don't know. You build a bigger sandbox >> to include everything. >> Exactly. Bigger sandbox. >> I I mean I think the only thing you can fully count on is that an assumption you made will turn out to be wrong for that. >> Right. Um and I think I think you when
[08:02:45] you operationalize these models there's a lot of work that goes into monitoring has where this is where steerability comes back into play. you know, if we see something we don't like or if some some assumption that we made turned out to be wrong, do we have the ability to course correct? Um, and then the real the real trick is to not be uh so wrong that it's your last trade or your last loan or your last whatever. >> Yeah. You know, I think yeah, sorry. >> Yeah, I'm not ahead. >> No, I think it's like what is the goal? If the goal is to learn something from this exercise, we're definitely going to
[08:03:16] learn something. If the goal is to have a fully automated traders, that's probably not going to happen. Mhm. Right. The gold matters, man. Thank you. Thanks for gaining. Yeah. >> So, we're just about out of time. I guess one final question in in the spirit of what Panos was asking, like, do is there actually meat to the Lucas critique in your minds? Or is the Lucas critique just you have a bad model um and you need a better model? Um, when it comes to economics, is there something really there that we just won't be able
[08:03:49] to overcome? I think black swans are real. I think there will always be things that you could not anticipate that have the ability to massively disrupt whatever the model is that you have. Um so I I I think in along a trajectory you can be right like you can actually be very good like past can predict performance. It's then once you get outside of that regime that suddenly it doesn't. And so the the question is how do you react when you get out get outside of that regime. So I think
[08:04:21] whether or not it's true or not isn't a binary. It's like for how long is it true, right? Is really what it comes down to. >> Yeah, I perfectly agree. The Lucas critique is reasonable. And uh in this game theoretic, you know, if your environment is game theoretic is even more cogent, but you know the question is you have a useful model, how long is it going to be useful for? and you know just keep monitoring you know and then yeah all these system are like checks and balances you know when you're out of the regime yeah it's time for or maybe
[08:04:54] you retrain it you know on a on a certain cadence every week every day >> and by the way with all of the the stuff we're building from the agentic layer a lot of that monitoring itself is now automatable with LM agents that can sit on top of these systems and see okay is it shifting why could it be shifting thing, automating the root cause analysis, like a lot of that stuff is uh you know, you can abstract away from having humans do all of that and then you really uh you get closer and closer to a closed loop system.
[08:05:27] >> Yep. All right. Well, thank you very much. Uh let's thank our panelists one last time. And now we will have a poster session. Um, I believe it's just outside this this room. Oh, it's back up on the sixth floor. Okay, so back up to the nice the nice view. All right, thank you everyone.