[00:00:00] talk is way more >> minutes. No, you're one and a half hours. >> Yeah. Yeah.
[00:00:50] Word is broken. All All right.
[00:01:42] >> Yes, exactly. Yeah.
[00:04:26] build screen sharing. in the best. >> No, we'll do a nice one. Is the camera working? >> Yes, I see. >> Yeah. So, should we start then? >> Uh, yeah, sure. >> So, let's start. Everyone, thanks for
[00:05:02] coming to day three of uh world models at booth. Um, today is going to be more tutorial focused and the leader of our first tutorial will be Professor Rando Bolstrio who at this point I think is best known for creating Leeppa and is kind of the iron man of the Jeepa cinematic unifor verse now. So, uh, he'll teach you how to train counterfactual jeepas for world models. And, uh, with that, I'll hand it to Randall. >> Thanks. Uh, yeah, I think I'm good with that. Yeah. Uh so yeah thanks for uh
[00:05:38] staying here for the three days. Uh so I put counterfactual in the title uh but this will actually be one of the open research question I will mention at the end. What we will see though is how to train uh non-ontfactual Japa and then at the end I will show you some open research question that you guys can look at. Uh so this is uh 90 minutes uh but I have a bit less slides on purpose so you can ask questions and uh we have more of a conversation uh than just you know me showing you stuff because most of the things around Japa are pretty much open
[00:06:14] in the air even about world models in general. I think you saw that on day one panel probably. So there is nothing like okay this is the right way to do it or you know this is what you need to make it work. Most of the times there is a lot of uh prior experience that comes in. It's a lot of you know careful parameter tuning, careful debugging uh you know looking at the embeddings you learn and trying to understand what happens why the performance are not great. And so that's the thing you have to to keep in mind. We are not yet at the stage like supervised cross entropy based training where you can just plug anything and you know Adam will do all
[00:06:51] the heavy lifting. The transformer will do all the heavy lifting and you will get good performance out of the box. So just something uh to keep in mind. I mean I'm sure anyone trained Japa from scratch before here like uh ah not so many people. Okay. Okay. Okay. So this this is good. So if you did you know the pain and if you did not you will be uh introduced to the pain later in the talk. Also the hope is that I will show you some tips and tricks so it's not as painful as a few few years ago. uh also just to mention so as you saw in the program there's like a two-hour window this
[00:07:27] afternoon for this sort of you know open uh time for a challenge and so I will present here two sort of small exercise uh if you have access to a GPU those things run in like five minutes and you can get result and so the hope is that uh we can look at the code together and in the afternoon session uh I can go around and you guys can cue you know variations of the JPA I will introduce You can either try to break it or try to improve it and then we'll have some presentation on the most interesting use case that you guys came up with and this is completely open if you want to take the code put different data or try to
[00:08:05] make the performance look like random by you know changing hyperparameters is really up to you the goal is for you to have endzone experience with JPA and world model and again you just need to have access to a GPU okay so if you get the code on this uh this repo uh it's very very simple 200 lines of code in total and then you can get uh get started. Uh Bradford will also show some things you can do during the afternoon session that will be more related to financial data. So you can also combine all those things. Great. So uh hopefully everyone can access that and again if you access to one GPU even just a Google collab that should be enough to get some results uh done. Okay. So uh I think as
[00:08:46] you saw right in the panel there is a not agreed upon definition of world models. Uh and so easier thing to do is to define foundation model instead at least for the first part of the talk. Uh and so very broadly speaking you can say a foundation model is really pre-trained system which means you have an architecture and a set of weights right a checkpoint that can solve many downstream task out of the box. So downstream task uh means different type of maybe uh use cases that different users will have. So for example, if you have an image model, maybe someone takes a picture of this room and wants to
[00:09:23] count how many people are there. Someone wants to figure out okay, we are at booth. Someone wants to figure out, you know, uh am I keeping people awake or not? So those things are different downstream task, different use case of what you want to do from your from your pre-trained model. uh and I would say in my case I want to emphasize out of the box which means you don't fine-tune the model you use it you know uh with frozen parameters that's really the goal if you have a strong model your pre-training was right you don't need to update its parameter to answer those questions uh in practice of course if you want to get a bit better performance you will do some fine tuning so you will start from those pre-train weights and allow a few
[00:10:00] updates of the weights based on a supervised signal from your downstream task but to me the need to do fine-tuning is just uh telling you that your pre-training loss was suboptimal. Okay, so my goal is really to have something that works great with uh frozen uh pre-trained model. Not everyone agrees on this and this is by the way open question. Can you have a single model that can solve very well many many downstream task out of the box? Uh maybe there is a trade-off and you cannot do that even at scale. So this is also open research question. Okay. And then maybe just to give a tiny bit of intuition again it's like very
[00:10:36] very crude summary right but um you can think of a distribution of input and distribution of task or output that you are interested in in predicting and so let's call this x and y and so if you already know the task you want to solve and you know this is the same task you have at training time and at testing time and you have label then you are pretty much just doing supervised learning. You will have the same input distribution. You'll have the same task or target distribution. You can just use those and train your model on this. Uh and then so this is like been around since forever and then people figured out okay this is not general enough
[00:11:12] because users uh yes maybe they want to solve the same task like imaget you want to classify if it's a dog or a car but of course you train on imaget which is created data set and now you go to the real world or maybe you want to classify drawings and things like this. So people first cared about you know shift in the x distribution right and so that's when you had a lot of papers looking at uh domain adaptation domain generalization where you still try to predict the same quantity you had at training time for example the class of the object in the image but it's just you have a shift in the input okay um and then after that of course people realize okay but this is
[00:11:48] still uh very very uh limited because many different people will try to predict different things so that's what I mentioned before so that's sort of where you get to the uh foundation model area where you will have new task uh at test time if you will. So I would say today foundation model are pretty much in this top right corner where you still need the X distribution to be roughly similar to what you saw at training time. It's not so easy if you train a a model on you know natural images to make it make it work out of the box on medical image. there is still quite a gap compared to retraining on the
[00:12:24] medical uh image data set. So I would say we're in the top right corner but the goal is to go really to the bottom right where you can have new distribution of input and also new task as well. Okay. So this is again just to give you maybe a different viewpoint on all those things uh relate and also yeah interrupt if there is any question or things you disagree uh yeah you can go to the microphone. Um okay so getting into a bit more of world model and and JPA so you saw every everyone remembers the Danny Jar talk on day one about dreamer the Minecraft thing. So the latest one so you have
[00:13:01] like multiple versions the latest one is dreamer v4 and so there is a lot of you know things that go into the the training of this guy but the first thing that we look at is the left part this causal tokenizer. So the way uh they first learn a representation of the world which for them is uh Minecraft is by uh learning an encoder that produces compressed latent state Z that can then reconstruct the original pixel inputs. Okay. So you learn this Z sort of you know state of the world uh by
[00:13:37] reconstruction. So you do it with a transformer. there is some details of the transformer or you do the attention and so on. It is causal in time so you cannot see the future to predict the the past frame and they do some augmentation masking and so on on top of it. But the key thing that matters for us is that this state Z is learned by reconstruction. Okay, so that's what people are most familiar with because that's what autoenccoders are doing. If you think about you know PCA that's also you can formulate PCA pretty much. So this is what people are used to do since forever and the idea is that uh people
[00:14:15] like this for a few reasons if you remember from the panel the first one that uh Danny Jar said very quickly is that uh this is actually you know less painful to train in a sense it's quite stable. So if you train a model like this by reconstruction it will learn to reconstruct. Okay. So it will produce good reconstruction training probably will not diverge so much. it will be robust to the detail of the architecture. So you will get good reconstructed pixels. Okay. However, what we argue and what I argue in the next few slides that this is not enough uh to learn a good representation Z of
[00:14:53] the world. Okay. But if you want something with a loss that looks okay and you know icon reconstruction, this is this is quite nice. Uh so any question on this? Everyone remember dreamer hopefully otherwise you can uh check back the day one um keynote. Okay, so let's see what's the problem with learning by reconstruction and this is our motivation to go towards Japa after work. So uh we're going to do the study on a pure image model to make things simpler in the first part of the of the talk. It's exactly the same principle that will apply to video and world models later. So the equivalent of what
[00:15:29] I showed before for image is called masked autoenccoder. Anyone heard about MAE before? Nice. Okay. Yes. So MAE are pretty nice. I think if you were already familiar with denoising autoenccoder, you might think, okay, this is just denosing autoenccoder for VAT. Uh that's uh true, but uh the main thing is that you try to reconstruct and learn embedding of your image by adding noise or dropping patch uh of the input. So you see on the left, you get the input, you will mask or you know drop patches from
[00:16:05] it. So you only see a partial part of the image. You will encode those observed patches through a transformer typically which gives you an embedding. Okay. So those are the blue the blue squares. Yeah. I don't know if I have my mouse. No. Okay. But the the blue squares you see here those are the embeddings uh of the image and then uh auto produce embeddings that you know try to capture something about the the input. you will reintroduce uh basically a mask token. So you will say okay actually this patch was masked this patch was masked. You will feed all of those through a decoder and the
[00:16:42] decoder needs to combine the information of the observed embeddings of the patches to reconstruct the original image on the right. Okay. So it's learning by reconstruction. You can use MSE loss or you know slightly more complicated losses but let's think of MSE to make it simple. So the goal is that uh because you only observe you know a piece of the of the input you need to learn you know okay if you see a ear here ear here ear here ear here ear ear here ear here ear and uh I don't know some pow here you need to figure out okay maybe it's a dog and maybe in the middle there should be a face and eyes and so on and so you for the model
[00:17:18] to learn this type of you know correlations between pixels so that you can make the reconstruction as accurate as possible okay so it's exactly the same principle as the one I showed here on the left um it's not sure yeah the one I showed here on the left just done for a single image okay so this is something that before in denoing autoenccoder was done by just adding for example goshian noise to the input image and trying to reconstruct the clean original image okay so is this clear so ME uh came out from meta uh and they had
[00:17:54] pretty good performance for a reconstruction based model but there was a couple of things that were very annoying which he had mentioned. The first one is that they take very very very long to train. So if you train for the same amount of flops as a jpa model, the performance you get out of the box is much much much smaller. Okay. And things start to look good once the amount of flops you use is gigantic. So you have a very slow you know convergence uh to learning good representation. And also another uh slight limitation is that you have the decoder which is an extra network you need to train as well. Uh and you throw
[00:18:31] it post training because you just care about having a good representation this. So you know all those things make it a bit uh more annoying and you know compute intensive. But the main thing is really that it takes so long to train and this you can see it in the paper by the way they show the um accuracy per per epoch. So why why is that the case right? So a lot of people uh like MAE because it produced nice images it looks good training is quite stable but there is a big gap in in performance and so that's what was a big the big bottleneck so to understand this let's look at this example so this is from a paper we did I
[00:19:07] will put the reference later on so I train two autoenccoders very very simple ones and I pipe the same input image and I show here the two groups of reconstruction so The guys in blue are the reconstruction from one autoenccoder and the guys in orange are the reconstruction from another autoenccoder. Okay, same architecture, same initialization, same uh shuffling of the data. So there is uh pretty much no you know inherent randomness in terms of the of the training process and now suppose I ask you okay I have those two candidate models which one do you want
[00:19:44] to use for your downstream application? Okay. So you can look at the images and uh by I no anyone see a difference between the two group of reconstructed images. Yes. No. Ah it's too far. Okay. Okay. Okay. But I mean even from far you can see it looks roughly the same right. So um in fact just to make it clearer I can give you here the uh reconstruction loss in MSE on the train and test set. Hopefully this is not too far you can see that
[00:20:20] they pretty much overlap on each other. And so you can see even if you think okay maybe visually there are some things too subal to see you can look at the actual MSE reconstruction loss they look exactly the same up to some you know randomness here and there both on train and test. So very important. Okay. So if you look at those metric, there is no way to see which autoenccoder is better or not. Yet if you take the learn embedding of the image and you try to classify which object you have in the in the image, you have a huge gap in performance. So one of them have as 20 points more than the other. Okay. So it
[00:20:58] means you have the exact same reconstruction you know reconstructed looking images same MSE loss but the usefulness uh in term of what you encode is very different and this is true both for linear probing and nonlinear probing because you might think okay you just you know artificially untangle the features whatever but a nonlinear predictor will will classify it good no you still have you still have a gap okay so this is uh a huge huge limitation of reconstruction based method and to me that is the main argument okay so I know many people have argument that if you reconstruct you will capture details or
[00:21:36] noise that maybe you don't care to me the main point is that even in a simple toy setting like this you have this sort of you know illos problem that the reconstruction loss is not uh sufficient to inform you about the usefulness of your model okay yeah >> so you have blue as default orange is steered What what do those settings mean? >> Uh yeah, so the setting is that I add a very very very very small uh gradient signal so that you keep the same reconstruction loss but you learn features that are more aligned with your downstream task. So this is just a way
[00:22:13] to artificially show that you can find an autoenccoder with the exact same reconstruction but with features that are not useful for more downstream task. So it's just artificial way to construct those two autoenccoders. Okay. >> If you just do the default MAE auto coding style, you will end up in the blue scenario which is the problem, >> right? Got it. Thanks. >> Yeah. Oh, so the reconstruction task is just to reconstruct pixel MSE loss and then it is imaginet uh classification task. So just what is the main object in the image? Yeah. Right. Any other question?
[00:22:51] So yes, so the main thing uh is that if you learn just with me, you will be in this blue scenario which is of course the uh problem. Okay, if you if you were in this orange scenario which is the better case, then that would be great. People will use reconstruction everywhere but by default because of the implicit bias that we will speak about later of the loss and the architecture you end up in this blue scenario. Okay. Okay. So you can produce good reconstruction error but you have features that are not so useful for most task. Okay.
[00:23:27] Yeah. >> Uh sorry. >> Ah yeah yeah sure sure. Although I don't have my mouse so uh yeah it's gonna be tough. Yeah I think I cannot do it. Or maybe if I wait hopefully this will work. Great. No, no, we are good. We are good. Nice. Good. Uh zero shot generalization. Great. Okay. So why do we have this uh
[00:24:05] issue? Okay. So why uh the reconstruction laws does not determine enough features you need to learn in a way that is useful for downstream case. uh so you can actually show and we have some uh very simple proof in the paper I was only able to prove things either in the linear regime or nonlinear but at initialization uh but that's a first step um and what we are able to show is that the reason is very simple actually so if you take your images and you look at the uh again de composition of the coariance matrix of your pixels and you look at the spectrum of this thing okay so you have
[00:24:41] the very known you know one F decay of the again values. I think if you did some signal processing you're already aware with that and this is the black line you see here. So the largest again values are on the right and you see you have this uh this decay and so uh this is in log scale by the way the y- axis and so what you see that you have a lot of energy in term of you know pca de composition on the first top again vectors. Okay. Now the good thing that you can show is when you reconstruct by mean square error the gradients are actually guided
[00:25:17] by those subspace. And so if you are looking for the you know gradient direction that gives you the best reduction in mean square error. You actually look at the top again vector of your data coariant matrix and this is what you will learn first. And so this is what we see in practice. So you see the red to blue lines are the reconstructed spectrum during training of autoenccoder and you see that you slowly match the spectrum starting from the right. So starting from the highest again value subspace and so what this
[00:25:53] shows that as training progress as you capture more and more of the spectrum that goes towards the higher frequency but you have a very very strong you know frequency bias for the low frequency in term of PCA again de composition. Okay. Uh so this is something you can actually show analytically and you can predict that a priority. So if you give me a data set I can tell you what you will learn first uh and this match the empirical experiments pretty closely no matter of the architecture whether it's like MLP reset transformer this is just the row gradient that you that you get
[00:26:30] so if your architecture is powerful enough you will follow this direction okay so so far I just told you what is a bias right in term of training dynamics but this do not explain why it's it's useful or not useful so This is the uh next thing. So if you look at what those high and low frequency correspond to uh you basically get those two uh those two filtering of the original image. So on the right you see okay the low frequency uh filtered image. So what the autoenccoder learns to reconstruct first. what features the encoder learns
[00:27:08] during the first few epochs of training are the one that are able to reconstruct what you see on the right. So you see very uh colorbased maybe a little bit you know contour based uh this type of thing but very very you know blurred in a sense and not useful for a lot of downstream task. So if you do autoenccoder training in the first phase of training you will learn a Z that captures this. Okay. So for most task this is not something that is rich enough to answer the classification question. If I ask you on the right, okay, what is this image? There is no
[00:27:44] way you know what what it is at prior. Okay, as opposed to looking at the image, if you just keep, you know, the the eye frequency part, which is what you see on the left and here you keep all the details. So you lose the color for example. So maybe for some particular task, if you have to predict for example, is it day or night, maybe it's harder to do with the left case, but for most other downstream task, the left one will be much more informative. If you want to do like uh segmentation, if you want to classify uh what is a class and count, you know, all these type of thing, the features you see on the left are the more useful one. Okay, but the thing is that those ones are the
[00:28:20] ones that are learned last by a reconstruction based method. Okay, so once you combine this and the slide before, you get a bit of insight as to why at least to me reconstruction based method are uh are not good. So does this make sense to everyone? So at this point I think some people might say yes but uh maybe you can you know find a better loss a better way to do reconstruction uh and so there is still hope right. So uh I will say uh yes but it seems to be a very very hard task. So first there is
[00:28:57] a bunch of papers uh that we did that look at this for also LLM and try to understand as a function of noise you have in the data for example you know what are those trends and those biases like uh all the figures I showed before are the top right paper the middle right is the one where you look at the presence of noise in the data and the bottom right is for is for text. So there is a lot of theoretical evidence that you know yeah train. >> Yeah. Yeah. Good question. So if you train on white ton data, then you rely much more on the bias of the augmentation and the architecture. So uh
[00:29:35] Alis did a paper on that. So you improve a little bit the convergence, but you still have a big gap in the end. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because this so this whole analysis with you know again de composition base spectrum this als for the linear regime and at initialization but then you also have higher order biases that come in during training which we are don't have in close form but it will be nice to study and those will kick in even if you have whitened data and this is uh not something new so if people are familiar with for example aeros work and a whole bunch of of people work on trying to learn what is a
[00:30:13] good you know measure of reconstruction of of images is a very very hard research problem and this goes back to you know probably even before the 70s this is just a very crude summary of our AI friend but what you see is that if your goal is to come up with a better uh objective than MSE you're basically competing with you know 60 years of extremely smart researchers who would try to do this and quote unquote did not succeed yet and so it's going to be a very very hard task and so sure there are some things so there is SSIM which is very very focused for image where you
[00:30:50] look at edges and colors and try to you know decouple things a bit more than MSE uh L pips which is not tractable you use already trained network to get embedding space to compute your reconstruction error so it means you already have access to a pre-trained model which you know defeats the world sense of it so there is really no good answer today and if you go outside of images it's even worse. I think if you speak to people in finance or you know healthcare if you try to reconstruct EG data or stock prices uh MSE is pretty bad. Yeah
[00:31:35] like dino you mentioned. Oh yes I will speak about those japa right after. Yeah yeah yeah. So this was a motivation on why uh we need Japa. Basically it's not as simple as trying to learn autoenccoder. Yeah. Yeah. So I will I will mention this right after. Okay. Okay. So this is uh so to me this is the main motivation to go towards JPA is that you really if you do reconstruction base you fight with very very very big research problem and I would argue if you are able to find a meaningful reconstruction loss uh it means you already learn you know everything because you are able to construct a loss with all the invariants that you need. the sensitivity that you need and so
[00:32:11] this is as hard as just training a foundation model in its own. So I will argue that it maybe even impossible to have a good reconstruction loss for images that will that will scale. Okay. So now let's go into JPA. So uh again we start with the image version just to keep things a bit simple. So this is pretty much the instantiation of most JPA. You have the same idea as MAE. So you create corruption of the image. It can be again by masking patches or it can be by you know doing all sort of other augmentation. You will encode those two images which gives you your Z representation and you want this uh Z
[00:32:48] and Z prime to be the same. So one thing I want to mention directly is that if you want Z and Z prime to be the same uh it means you want to be invariant to the datation you applied in the input. And as soon as you say you want to be invariant to something, of course someone can come and say well I can design a downstream task that lives exactly in this invariant subspace and for which you will have random performance. So that's true but the challenge is to figure out what is the data augmentation so that maybe I will have bad performance on a few task but I will have extremely strong zero shot performance on all the other task and so
[00:33:25] the world challenge is to figure out how to have the best you know distribution of performance with a with a high average uh although you sacrifice a couple of downstream task when you do this okay uh and this will be true for pretty much pretty much everything So the goal is to have Z and Z prime match. So as Yan mentioned you have a many many ways to uh do this efficiently. So if you just try to solve this you know MSE based loss of course the model will say well for any input I will predict the same constant and the problem is solved. So this is dimensional collapse and that's what all the JPA are fighting for. You want to solve this uh
[00:34:02] prediction or invariance task while keeping a Z that is diverse on the other axis. you don't specify your invariance. Okay. So the first thing I want to mention which is Dino is distillation based teacher student based and this was a huge breakthrough that's was probably why people started caring about SSL at the time. Um and it looks like this. So this is very simplified schematic but you have your two views X1 X2. You go to your encoder you have this EMA of the parameters from one encoder to the
[00:34:38] other. So this is what Yan also mentioned and then you have a bunch of other tricks. So for example you will center the embedding you will apply soft max to turn things into priority distribution and then the prediction is now in term of cross entropy instead of mean square error between Z and Z prime. But that's the same spirit as we saw before. So this was huge extremely good performance. Uh but the problem is that you have a lot of challenges. So the EMA force you to keep a copy of your model. So it's very GPU memory intensive. Also the EMA, you know, how fast or how slow is the EMA of the weight is another
[00:35:14] hyperp parameter. And the loss is not interpretable because of this EMA type of thing. You can see the loss actually increase but the quality of your model become better and better. So there are a lot of challenges with that. Um and that's why the performance are very sensitive to those hyperparameters. So the numbers don't matter much. The numbers are image net 1K classification accuracy higher the better. The only thing I want to mention is that you see if you change some of the hyperp parameters you can go from almost state-of-the-art performance to completely random performance because the only thing that prevents collapse is
[00:35:50] this you know EMA teacher student uh dynamic which is very very unstable. Okay. So this is the main pain point the main bottleneck and so this is why Dino uh people have tried to use Dynino in many many different domains and if the original hyperparameters don't transfer it becomes you know extremely hard to do a new hyperparameter search and to make dyno work reliably. So this is this is why uh also when you speak to many people they will tell you okay they don't want to train Japas because you have this pain point of you know preventing collapse. Okay.
[00:36:26] So uh at this point the main thing is okay how to prevent collapse in a in a reliable way. So this is uh now going to regularization based anti-colapse and cig specifically. So I won't go so much into the motivation uh of it but there are some arguments of course under you know maybe strong hypothesis you tell me that a good Z is aotropic ganzi. Okay. It's sort of the you know no prior best worst case scenario. If you don't know what you want to solve downstream make Z is aotropician and you are as safe as possible. Okay. So with this we
[00:37:04] can have a regularization based JPA where you want Z and Z prime to match. So you want to be invariant to your transformation but then Z across different images should look like isotropic gan IID samples. Okay. By definition if you do this of course they cannot be collapsed otherwise it will not be isotropic cushion. Okay so just giving you a tiny bit of insight into creg uh so the way it will work is by having a couple of implementation tricks because of course enforcing isotropic goshan in you know 1000 dimension is very very hard task.
[00:37:40] So the first thing we need is this craral the theorem many people have different name for it depending on their background. The only thing it says that the quantity of interest for us on the right which says okay X which is our empirical distribution in you know 500 dimension should match the isotropic goan distribution Y which is our target distribution. Okay. So what we want is this right equality here. But this is very hard to do in 500 dimension. So instead there is this equivalent that says we can do 1D projections of the empirical distribution and your target distribution. And if all the 1D projections match then this is
[00:38:17] equivalent as saying the original multivariate distributions match. Okay. So this is the first key component. This is not new by the way. So crime world serum itself is like you know 80 years old or something and there is a lot of slice based techniques that have been around here for optimal transport and and so this is like very very known in in statistics. Uh I'm sure XY did you know the Kmer world CRM? I mean it's kind of obvious though. >> Okay. Okay. Okay. So you say that's obvious for statisticians um but typically people yeah don't always learn
[00:38:53] about it but this is very very powerful one that justify all the slicing techniques. So um in our case of course the target is a multivariatropic gosh and so once you do this projection on a unit norm direction the target becomes a 01 goan in 1D. Okay. So this will look like this in practice. So uh you have your empirical distribution. Uh you do the projection. You get the empirical one which are for example one in green, one in orange and one in yellow. Uh they vary because depending on the direction you use to project of course you get different 1D distribution and then you
[00:39:31] want those to match the black line which is the goian 01. Okay. So now you are back in 1D space and you want to do this distribution matching. Uh yeah so this is just summarizing this. So remember the original one are in 500 dimension. You project you get the 1D ones and now you want to do distribution matching on each of the 1D distributions. So at this point you might say okay but it's still uh unclear how to do this distribution matching right there is not a single way to do this efficiently. So what we chose is uh to use a goodness of fit test called epspooly uh which has
[00:40:07] some nice benefits. So it is based on the characteristic function okay which is a for transform of the of the distribution. Uh the nice thing is that it fully identifies the distribution and it always exist. So if you have two distribution with the same characteristic function that's good you are happy you don't need anything else and you don't need to worry about you know moments do they exist or not and so on. Of course in practice they will exist because we deal with deepness but they have some the catistic function has some nice properties and also it's maybe the most more important thing it's super efficient and fast to compute on GPU uh because you can just compute your
[00:40:44] quadrure nodes for the integral you use this to uh basically integrate your points after you take the complex exponential and then you average over the uh over the samples and you also average across devices. So you don't need to do you know any weird all gather and GPU intensive operation. So it's literally one line of code and you can get your empirical characteristic function. It's differentiable gradient is you know very nice bonded curvature is nice as well. So it's very very nice for gradient based training. Okay. And since I say that I also want to mention if you work on Japa and you want to come
[00:41:20] up with a new objective always keep in mind to look at the gradients uh is the loss friendly to uh differentiation and so on because that's also a big factor to performance. Okay. So the loss itself will be compute the empirical characteristic function and compare to the target characteristic uh function and you do this for each of the 1D projections. Okay, I won't go into so much detail but yes the integral here can be approximated very very well uh very quickly so it's not a bottleneck and this is the full implementation so I will just uh expand all of this it is in
[00:41:58] the code uh that I gave you before I just want to mention the full thing you see is like 20ish line of code and this implementation is the official one that works on multiple GPUs the only gotcha I want to emphasize size is the first part which is that you want the directions to be the same across GPU. So you just need to be a bit mindful about the random seed you use to sample the direction. So you want same direction across GPUs and then everything falls back in very easily. So very very very easy to um to compute at any scale. Okay.
[00:42:34] Uh okay. So very quickly to give you some insight. So now you have two terms in your loss. O isotropic oceanian is Z and O invariant or O close Z and Z prime R. Okay, so we have the prediction loss and the c loss. And so what you see here is a depiction of those two losses across many many different hyperparameters and the color is the performance uh on downstream task which is a classification task. So there is a bunch of them on the left you see Galaxy 10 you have inet 10 and then imaget 1k and what you see is that to get good
[00:43:10] performance so to go in the red area you have the sort of level set where you need jointly a good cig loss and a good prediction loss. Okay and this is very intuitive because if you just have good prediction loss it means you are collapsed. So cg uh can be I which means you cannot solve anything right you just predict a constant for any input. Similarly, if you just have a small cig loss but your prediction loss is high, it means you did not learn the right invariance that you specify. So you provide isotropic gosh and these but they are you know completely untangled scattered everywhere and so you don't have a good uh downstream task performance. So you really need those
[00:43:46] two things to go down together and this is where you get those nice those nice strengths. But this is nice because you see you can get training set uh metrics that are informative of test time performance at least within you know this evolution. So you see we have reset vit and a bunch of classification task. It may not be true for all the possible downstream task but it seems to hold quite nicely. Yes. >> It feels a bit >> it feels a bit counterintuitive that the vit is actually doing worse than the ResNet 50. You know like EIT are
[00:44:24] arguably bigger and >> so this is imaget 1k on the right. So you have 1,00 class. Do you mean the performance itself? >> The performance scale. >> This one is imaget 1k. So you try to predict you know 10,00 class uh for the object. The middle one is imaget 10. So it's much simpler classification task. >> Ah okay. >> So it's like different task. Yeah. Yeah. But uh yeah 73% on immer 1k is what you would consider you know not sot but good yeah great uh and very last thing I want to mention because this is very important for people here uh from business school and finance is that we
[00:45:00] don't assume anything about the architecture okay which means or the domain in fact uh which means you can take any of your favorite architecture can be more you know recurrent based uh SSM anything and you can apply the exact same training recipe you It's very different from other methods that assume you have a vit and you know a very constructed setup. And so what we did here is we took imaget 10. So very simple classification task and we threw 50 different architectures out of the box and you see they all train and learn something meaningful. Of course we have a small delta of accuracy but you get this out of the box without any
[00:45:37] particular tuning. So this is also something very important because when you want to do JPA on new domains with new architecture you need this stability. Okay. All right. So this was uh imaget 10. So I put if you uh anyone went to check the repo I mentioned at the beginning. No one. Okay. So definitely if you can go check it uh I just want to mention quickly I don't know if I have it here just to show quickly. So this will be part of the exercise this afternoon. Yes. Yeah. So there is like this uh very very small uh setup. It's very what like
[00:46:15] 130 lines total and this implements exactly what I mentioned before. So you have uh your data loader, you define your transformation, you define your view generation with those two those two things, you create your data loader. Okay. And then you do training with slow JPA which is um the loss I showed you just before. Uh you just have to implement your forward pass. Uh and you uh is going to train very quickly. This setup I put here, it will train 8 minutes on one GPU. It will give you 80% accuracy. Okay, so this is good enough for you to play with. So what you can do
[00:46:52] uh this afternoon is that you can take this code and you can start playing with it. So you can see what if my target distribution is not isotropic ganian anymore. So you will need to rederive the target characteristic function and put this one instead of the goian 01 in epsuly and then you can launch training and see how does it change performance. Okay. Or you can vary the number of views or you can vary the waiting between the you know creg and prediction loss. So this uh inet 10 py is the uh file that you can use during the session this afternoon to try to stress test you
[00:47:28] know uh this method. Okay you can change the encoder you can do all sort of things. Uh and then to show you performance we have this online probe that during training look at Z try to predict the class for imaget 10. Of course the gradient is detached right. So it does not bias your your training and this report accuracy live. Yeah. Uh I think even a Google collab should be able to run this. So if you want you can try it uh on Google collab. I think
[00:48:06] uh I don't have open GPU access but uh if you don't have GPU the second example I will show after can be maybe also more suited but yeah if you have access to GPU definitely try to play with this and change the target distribution and so on to see the impact on performance okay so this was the first one okay so now uh I went a little bit slow so uh let's go to wall modeling so this is a very ambiguous question right you saw everyone give different answers before uh maybe like a very very distilled one is to say a world model is a is a foundation model that's the thing
[00:48:43] everyone agreed on right it was my first question on the panel so a world model should be able to solve many task which is the cing of a foundation model but in addition you understand oh an environment evolves over time and time does not have to be actual time so you can define the axis you want to model the dynamics on arbitrarily right if you are doing like I don't know stocks uh you could use time as time but maybe you want to use sectors as time or it can be anything that you that you want and potentially this is condition on actions which are sort of external signal that as a user you can use to try to steer
[00:49:19] the environment and therefore to steer the the prediction of the of the dynamics evolution. Okay. So uh for this we use exactly the same recipe. So now you have um trajectory. So you have images at T 1 2 3 4. You want to produce nedding Z. This is what we saw in the dreamer slide at the beginning. Uh you want to model the dynamics. So you want to predict ZT + one given ZT and optionally 80. And of course if you just do this prediction task, you again have the same collapse problem as before, right? So dreamer does not collapse because Z must
[00:49:55] reconstruct the input. So it cannot collapse. In our case, we don't want to do reconstruction. So we use CG instead. Okay, but exactly same recipe as before. It's just now you have this time axis and you do this dynamics modeling over time. Okay, everything clear for this setup. Nice. So uh this is how it looks in practice. So this is an example just to emphasize that although we don't learn to reconstruct, we do learn a reach Z and we can visualize this. So what we can do is we train lower model with just C gray. Post training we train a decoder that will look at Z and try to
[00:50:32] reconstruct the pixels. So very important this is not done during training. So it does not impact the training dynamics. It's just for visualization purposes. And what we pipe to the model of course we have a a context uh of past frames. So those are the first ones on the on the left. And then we only feed the actions like the five next actions to the predictor which will give us five prediction of these. So this this will be you know Z15 Z20 Z25 we move by a step of five uh of five and now we take those predictions and we use a decoder to see what they look like in input space in pixel space. Okay. So
[00:51:11] what you see is that first of all you do capture the right dynamics. So you see you do see the arm moving up which is only predicted from giving the actions to the world model. Also you see you capture a lot of details about the joints the cube but there are some things that you don't capture perfectly. So for example maybe the exact rotation of the cube is not captured or the rotation of the gripper. So you see you do have a lossy compression in Z via C greg and the prediction task. And this is a very big research question. So what do you capture or not? And how can you
[00:51:48] assess if you learn a good Z without having to reconstruct? This is a big big research question. But you see that just by doing CG and prediction, you learn these that you know capture a lot of things about the the input. Okay. So this is something that you should always do when you train a world model. Always, you know, plug detached online decoder and see what it reconstruct because this is quite informative to see if you have a collapse Z or if you have a Z that actually did not collapse enough and the reconstruction is very crisp. Okay, so definitely do that uh for debugging purposes as well. Okay, so now um what else can you do once you train this this
[00:52:25] SW model? So this uh people mentioned it also on day one. So you have this world model that in Latin space can predict you know what will be the next state of the world condition on action. So now you can take a goal and you can take a initialization point and see okay given those two embeddings so Z1 and Z goal what would be the sequence of action that brings me there okay and you can do this so right now people do it in a very ado way it's like blackbox optimization but they search they randomly sample a whole bunch of action pipe it through the predictor see what is a prediction
[00:53:02] of Z after you do all those roll out with the sample actions is it close to my Z goal or not? If yes, it's a good candidate if not I just resample more. Okay, so you do like this sort of blackbox search on actions. You can do gradient based too but some some flavors of of optimizations and then you will find a good set of actions that you can then execute in the real world to reach your goal. Okay, so this is the whole planning thing uh that Yan and other people mentioned on on day one. And the benefit of this is that you can really change this however you want at test time. You can solve a new goal. You can
[00:53:38] solve for new task that you did not see during training. Yeah. Uh the cost afterwards. Sorry. Oh yeah. Yeah. So the cost is by comparing the embedding of the goal frame and the predicted embedding that will happen after you have your candidate actions. So after doing those 10 actions, do I get an embedding that is closer to my goal embedding or not? This is what you want to compare. So the cost is between uh ZH which is after you roll out those sample action and your
[00:54:14] goal embedding. Yeah, you can have variations of this where you say okay I want to not just compare the last one. I want to you know always move towards my goals. You could have different cost at different time step. There are many variations of this where you could uh sample sub goals first. You know there are a lot of tricks because this is a blackbox optimization pretty much. So it's very hard to do. If you think your actions are even just 10 dimension and you have 10 time step which is nothing, right? 10 time step will be just doing this already. You have like 100 dimensional space you do blackbox optimization in. So this is a huge huge research question as well. Yeah. Yeah.
[00:54:51] >> So this is for the training time for >> No. So this is all post training. So during training you just learn the encoder and the predictor from the offline data set that you have to learn the dynamics of the world and then post training you will keep encoder and predictor frozen and sample the action to see how to uh solve your goal. Yeah. So all of this is done post training inference time. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. form on a on a sphere. >> Yeah. >> What do other what do other um
[00:55:29] regularizations do here? Or can you give like a very short thing like gaution? Yeah. >> It must be gshian. >> Yeah. Yeah. So the isotropic gosh you can reparameterize it as uniform on the sphere plus k square in term of radius which of course if you keep expanding the dimension and you have the right normalization will become this direct and so you become uniform on the hypersphere. So in the limit yes you become uniform on the hypersphere and this is related to other regularization like contrastive learning that also try to put points uniformly on the hypersphere. But the way they do it is
[00:56:05] through negative pairs which is very very you know simple inefficient. You need to see what is your nearest neighbor and push this guy away you know like triplet loss type of thing. And so at the end of the day you do have other regularizer like this. But the the big question is which distribution. So in my opinion whether you do uniform on the sphere or isotropic ocean it will be the same thing but the bigger question is how to enforce this distribution. So do you want to be contrastive? Do you want to use slicing techniques or do you want to use other distribution matching? And this is the one that really drives performance. >> But why why gshian or uniform on the
[00:56:42] sphere even like why? >> So this uh in the uh I don't know if I put it here. Um yeah so I will put it after but in the loa paper we have uh some motivations on why is aotropic gian at a very high level it is if you don't know what the downstream task you will want to solve and you try to optimize for which distribution on z minimize the worst case uh risk then you can identify this distribution to be isotropic gosh there is a lot of assumptions because the way you measure your ability to solve a task is by doing le square we
[00:57:18] choose L2 norm and so you know a lot of those things automatically make isotropic goan appear but this is true also if you use can neighbor and kernel method but it's it's very tied to how you measure success for you if you have more prior on your downstream task or a different way to match your label you will have a different answer yeah but this you can rederive these things very easily yeah >> great okay so this one more >> so The if we like recall the talk from Alexandra FA yesterday, she mentioned
[00:57:54] that the design of the cost, the action space and even generating the actions >> are going to be like monsters in themselves. So within this pipeline are you also subject to that like >> within the So how are the sequence of actions generated in this pipeline? Uh so you mean during training or uh >> during training? Yeah. >> Oh yeah. So during training this is a big research question. So most of the time you have already expert trajectories or partially expert trajectories. So uh you are very sensitive to that. You need a data set that explores you know your state space
[00:58:30] pretty much. So if you just have a random policy to collect data you will never for example have an interaction with a cube. So you will not learn a meaningful world model. So you do need some expert trajectory uh in there uh and so this is typically done by you know collecting human based uh data and so on. Uh so you are very sensitive to the quality of your of your data set. Yeah. Yeah. This might disappear at scale. Uh but this is not clear yet. >> So to what degree is this kind of just imitation learning and to what degree is this world? >> Yeah. So you can think of it I mean if you want a very crude uh way to think of
[00:59:06] it it is sort of imitation learning in terms of dynamics but because you do planning at test time you can solve new task that you did not see during training. >> So it's not imitation learning in the full sense of it that you can only solve task you observed as well. >> Thanks. >> Yeah. Okay. Great. Uh okay. So this is just an example of what it looks like. uh small you know 3D cube manipulation push t you need to move the t to a goal so the right frame is the goal the left video is what we plan for uh and execute okay uh so there is a lot of things that
[00:59:44] go into the planning that's also something I want to mention if you do world modeling research uh the planning performance uh are very very sensitive to uh the planner you use uh when do you replant so first of all you do open loop or closed loop uh control. So all of those thing make the performance very very sensitive uh and so typically it's not the nice signal to do you know research. So I would say if you want to do research in that just looking at the decoded frame is very informative then the next thing you can do is you can take your Z embeddings and try to predict some known properties of the
[01:00:21] object. So for example for the cube it could be the XYZ position of the cube you know sort of proxy metrics like this. So this is much more informative and once those look good you can move to planning and you know validate planning performance but otherwise it's extremely hard to do research based on planning performance because it takes also a lot of time right if you have a big model and you want to solve you know this sort of 3D cube task you might use a GPU for 10 minutes for the stuff to plan so it's like very uh very slow signal as well so just something to keep in mind yeah
[01:00:58] Uh so here it is retrained for each data set but we have uh new experiments which show you can just combine everything and use the same one. Yeah. Yeah. Those are all synthetic environments though. So just to keep in mind but yeah you can perfectly put uh you just need to be careful on how you deal with actions because different environments have different action space right but this typically is just a that you that you learn. So yeah great. Okay. So uh yeah so the the paper I mentioned so the low jar one top left is the one that mention why isotropic gosham low model top right is the one
[01:01:34] that goes to world modeling and then just to mention that you can do things outside of isotropic gosh there are also those two nice paper bylun who you saw yesterday I think so rectified LPJ and LPWM which look at different distributions for Z where you bring sparity laplas distribution you know this type of thing. So the takeaway is that in term of performance it does not seem to matter so much as long as you feed the distribution in a nice way. So we also use sliced uh distribution matching whether it's EPS pulley or sliced
[01:02:11] werstein but same thing uh but it seems that depending on the setup things outside of isotropic goan could be interesting to explore and that's in fact a big a big research question but yeah everything is within those four guys. Okay. So now going to the second exercise. Uh so if you go back to the repo, anyone check the repo or still no? Ah yes, nice. We have a few a few ends now. So there is this um this nice variation. So mmnist which is for moving amnest. So again the wall code is very
[01:02:48] short. It's like 300 lines total. It has everything from the data training and so on. And what this guy is doing is a low wall model on a very simple setup where you have emnes digit and your actions are to move the digit left, right, up, down. Okay, you learn a wall model exactly like we saw before. You want to learn an embedding and then to uh have good understanding of the dynamics in space. Uh and then once you train this guy also it trains within like 10 minutes if you have a GPU. It's going to dump a checkpoint and you can run this app.p py. So you can actually play with
[01:03:26] it. So I don't know if I still have it open. Uh yeah. Yes. So this is one I trained yesterday night. So uh let's regenerate it. So you will take a digits or maybe I should not have regenerated. Anyway, uh yeah, because I think I not connected to the savior, but anyway. So you have a setup like this where you can live interact with your own checkpoint to see how does it imagine you know the digit will go. So this is all going to be live based on the checkpoint that you will produce yourself by running the cut. On the left it will be the ground truth where you move the digit left and
[01:04:03] right and on the right it will be the decoded imagining trajectory. And so of course as you keep interacting with it as you have a small distribution shift so you will see the digit go uh further and further away from the uh truth one and you can change which digit you want to use but you can interact with your world model live extremely fast it's a small ResNet 9 uh so you can just play with it and I also put uh I also track uh how good is the embedding to do other tasks. So for example, you see if you look at Z and you try to predict the digit accuracy, you don't get something
[01:04:39] crazy good, but you reach roughly 80% with a with a nonlinear probe. So what you will see when you interact with your world model live is that sometime a seven forms into a eight or you have this you know weird shift. Uh this by the way is something in the afternoon session you can play with maybe bigger encoder different IP parameter to try to bring this guy up and you can also see if you can predict the position and this is extremely uh good. So uh the uh XY position of the digit that you get from Z is you know near near perfect. And so what you will see when you interact with
[01:05:15] your world model is that you always track the position extremely extremely well. Even if you keep you know like 20 steps ahead you do this open loop roll out you will see the position is actually very very faithful but you do have a small you know uh weird shaping of the actual digit number. Okay. So again if you have a GPU you can run the uh mm py code within 10 minutes you get a checkpoint which then you can execute in this app to see how does your checkpoint you know understand the world and the dynamics of the world of course it's just emnest right single GPU 10
[01:05:51] minutes we cannot do much more but you can play with it okay so in the afternoon session definitely play with that if you are interested with SW modeling I also added an option to have an action which is to rotate uh the digits as well. Okay. So if you access to GPU is definitely uh fun to to train on on that. Great. Okay. So those are the two things you can do uh you can do in the open session this afternoon. All right. So now uh I just want to bring a little bit of a different view and some open research questions. So the first one is a is a paper that came out quite
[01:06:28] recently where uh basically the argument of many people is that you should not capture as much as you can in Z which is what C Greg is trying to do. You should only capture what uh was sort of used by the agent to determine the action. Okay. And so this perception for action uh is something that you can use as a regularizer to prevent collapse. So instead of saying Z should beotropic gan what you can say is we need Z that is rich enough so that ZT and ZT + one can
[01:07:04] recover 80. Okay. So this is a different viewpoint and it's a little bit more uh maybe based on you know uh human learning. Um but this is also a way to prevent collapse and so this specific type of loss is what you see here. The inverse model is called u IDM typically so inverse dynamic modeling. So given ZT ZT plus one you want to predict 80 and you can general generalize this to anything. So you can have ZT ZT plus K and you know predict the K actions uh in between. So of course this prevents collapse because if Z captures no
[01:07:41] information you cannot predict this 80 meaningfully. So if you want you can completely remove Craig keep your prediction loss and add this uh inverse dynamic loss. Okay. So the two losses are forward loss between your prediction of Z+1 and true ZT plus one and your inverse loss which is your prediction of 80 and the true 80. Okay. Yeah. Why not just uh from the offline sent uh imitation learn the policy directly? >> Yeah, it's related to imitation learning. Exactly. Yeah. >> Okay. So here ZT could just be like an inter intermediate layer in a in a
[01:08:17] policy that produce my A. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So this is very uh close to uh imitation learning uh and in a in a inverse way but if you think of you know goal condition behavior cloning this type of thing it's it's very similar. So the the the main argument here is to really think do we want to capture everything in Z uh do we want to use Cray but also is it useful to have this type of additional regularizer because if you think about it depending on how strong is your inverse model suppose it's just linear it means you must be able to capture dynamics in a way that linear
[01:08:54] combination of ZT and ZT plus one recovers 80 and this is a very very strong geometric constraint on how you put your Z embedded which you don't have with Creg, right? And so what we see that if you do this type of of loss, you actually get embedded that are much easier to optimize for at planning time. And so that's also something you have to keep in mind. And so that's why some of the latest things actually combine NC Greg and IDM because what you really really want is not just have uncolapsed or reach this but you want a space you know a predictor where planning is extremely fast and and efficient and so
[01:09:31] this is also a very very big uh research problem. Um also one thing in uh favor of saying IDM alone is not enough is that of course now you are dependent on the richness of your action. So this is a toy example where you have a shape you see at the top and then you have the dynamics of the shape moving but we only give to the IDM loss differentness of action. So you see the first true is we don't uh use anything and then you completely lose information about the xy position and the shape of the object. Okay. If you give only xy as control so
[01:10:08] you can just you know move left and right but we don't give the other action as part of the IDM loss then you do preserve the xy position but you basically learn something that is shape invariant. Okay. And only when you have the full setup where you give all the actions that actually govern the dynamics. So X Y and rotation then the IDM loss is able to capture these that are rich enough to reconstruct the object. And so that's something to keep in mind of course is that IDM because it only relies on predicting actions to prevent collapse is extremely sensitive to the richness of action that you have. And so that's why uh in practice we
[01:10:46] never observe all the the actions, right? And so combining Creg and and IDM is a a very promising pass. Yeah. >> Assume the underlying dynamics is feature mistake. >> Oh yeah. Yeah. Good question. So this I will uh mention it a bit later but most of the thing I showed assume you observe pretty much everything and it's pretty deterministic or the thing that is not deterministic is what you actually don't care to capture. So you are okay to just learn the conditional mean and disregard this other thing. Yeah. But this is a big research question to deal with
[01:11:23] partially observed setup and stoastic cases where you want to not just disregard the stoasticity. Yeah. Yeah. So this I will mention it a bit later but that's one of the research question. Yeah. >> Another question is >> tuning you only do one stamp ahead right? One stamp ahead with this like each step. >> Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So this one I mentioned indeed lower model by default is t to t+1. In fact you have we have a context of three. So you have like t minus4 to t and you predict t+1. But there are variations of this where you predict t+2 t + 3. So this multi- horizon prediction
[01:12:00] also helps to stabilize the training of the dynamics model. Yeah. Yeah. So this this is something people do also. >> Yeah. Yeah. Great. So this is the reference for for this uh this paper. But again the key thing same as what we spoke about for the image case is what do we care to capture? What are we willing to disregard if it can improve planning and success rate for 99% of the of the users. Okay. So now the last thing I want to mention very quickly is um oh can we try to understand a bit better uh what those prediction loss are doing and how to
[01:12:37] design better prediction loss. So you saw before I I had those two mutation and I said okay those guys should be matching for the world modeling one you say t should predict t plus one. So you are very very you know dependent on defining your prediction loss and if you played with jpa before the prediction loss is actually the one that is you know extremely important to design. So once you have a non-colab z and you do the search over the prediction task this is what can give you huge benefit in term of performance. So how can we make sense of this mathematically? So there is an interesting parallel or derivation
[01:13:13] you can do with supervised learning. So I would say this is very nice to get some some uh intuition. So suppose we start with the top equation which is you know plain MSE. So you have your uh embedding f of x you do linear probe on this. So you have uh your W weight your bias and you try to regress on your targets Y okay you also have um forous norm on W just to handle case where you have a low rank embedding so suppose you do this supervised learning task okay now what you will do is that you will minimize explicitly for W and B so I'm
[01:13:53] sure everyone is familiar with that right that's typical le square problem Obviously you have a closed form solution for W and B. Okay. Uh and this is what you see in equation two. So if you solve explicitly for W and B, you plug those cross form in and then you do a little bit of you know very simple algebra. Uh I was able to do it before AI. So you know it's not complicated. uh you can get a form that looks like equation two where v is a uh matrix the left uh singular vectors of your
[01:14:30] embeddings. So you can think of v as whitened embeddings. Okay. So why this loss is very interesting because now you have this ypose y which is n byn n being the number of sample. So this is a big you know symmetric positive definite matrix that tells you all the labels correlate in term of inner product between different pairs of points. Okay. So you can think of this as sort of a relationship graph between all the samples you have and then this trace and
[01:15:06] this projection with uh V and V transpose looks at how good your signal aligns with this graph. So for people familiar with you know la shenanigan maps and this type of spectral embedding method this is exactly the type of objective you you have in those cases and so you see if you you start from this supervised learning problem you solve exactly for the linear head you get a new loss formulation that is now not a function of y but of this ypose matrix and this is very very nice because those are coordinate free labels okay you just need to know the
[01:15:43] relationship or describe what relationship you want between pairs of samples. Okay. And this this loss you see here if you say okay I don't know why I will try to you know come up with I don't know why y transpose sorry so the big matrix uh the big graph and I will come up with a way to construct this graph then this is exactly what we do in Japan and in SSL in general and when we define those views that you saw before what we actually do is to try to construct this graph so we gener generate those views and you say, well,
[01:16:20] I created those guys by N, so I don't know what's the Y, but I know their Y transpose is going to be I because I want the prediction to be the same. To me, those guys encode the same thing. So, they should have pretty much the same label. And so, if you look at this big graph of n byn size and you look at the entry where two samples are pairs, this is entry where you will have a one and when you are not a positive pair, you have a zero. Okay, so this is pretty intuitive uh because now designing a prediction loss under this formulation is the same as designing a graph on the
[01:16:57] relationship you want your embeddings to have. Okay, is this clear at all? Even just intuitively, no. I see no. Was it a yes or a no? Clear or not clear? Clear. Okay, good. Nice. So this is very very important because uh it's much easier to figure out you know what should be the relationship between samples as opposed to what is the label for this. If I show you two pictures of a very specific dog and I ask you, okay, what's the dog breed? You will not know. But I ask you, is it the same dog breed? Everyone will know, right? So it's much easier to
[01:17:33] design this relationship uh graph. So this is just a a visual example. So suppose you have your data set that are those four images. If you do supervised learning with data augmentation, you will connect all the augmented views of the image of the same class. So you say you have like two uh complete graph based on the classes. So this is the the the way to depict this this uh geometric structure. If you do the self-supervised learning way you only connect the positive views and so you have as many you know independent complete subgraph as you have samples and each one has a
[01:18:10] number of views guys that are connected to each other. Okay, so those are just different structure in term of of graph. But now you can just specify the graph which implicitly specifies a prediction loss and therefore you can plug that into your uh your SSL and JPA pre training objective. Uh and so this is something that enables a lot of things. So suppose you deal with data where you have some side information can be caption can be you know if you take pictures uh there is all the possible you know location type of phone blah blah blah and typically those metadata are things you can use to inform the
[01:18:46] construction of this graph. Okay so this is something that you can now principally use to have a better prediction task to train your your JPA model. Okay. So this is something uh that will look like this. So you have your your estimated graph the ground truth graph and now with this new objective you can just give the wall set of embeddings the graph and the objective takes care of of everything. Okay so this is uh something that we've been using for example where we use captions as metadata thing like this and it improve performance a lot. This is just an example again another way to visualize this uh this big matrix is uh
[01:19:24] like you see here. So the typical you know let's say supervised way would be to um collect the guys of the same class and connect them. But here we use captions as a side metadata to have a richer graph. And you see that actually even dog and cat should not be completely disconnected from your graph because maybe they share the same background on those image. And so you get a much richer a much denser graph. And we show that if you do this for example for image uh text pre training you obtain something that uh outperforms clips by by eye I margin. So this is
[01:20:00] something I wanted to mention just to you know give some insight as to oh can we you know maybe in the next year have better specification of prediction task through this graph and also if you are interested in theory uh this is nice because it gives you an exact link between supervised regression task and self-s supervised jpa pre training objective so you can use a lot of theory Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So if you have some prior on the task, you can directly use that to uh inform the graph. In
[01:20:37] fact, we show if you have the true labels Y of one specific task and you use that to build the graph, you get up to machine precision the exact same uh weights and models than if you do directly supervised learning. So think of this as really, you know, equivalent to supervised learning. if you use your true y to build the graph. Yeah. Yeah. Great. Okay. So, this has a lot of reference. Uh the the first one I want to mention maybe the one on the right. So, the burst of self-s supervised learning which is the one that does this this derivation. Then the one on the left
[01:21:13] relational representation learning is the one where we see what is the impact of misspecifying the graph or having noise in the estimate of the graph. So we have this ground truth graph this oracle graph that we can never observe that will be the one that produce the best world model ever and we can only estimate it how does estimation noise impact performance if you have a false positive versus a false negative which one is more impactful in performance and this is not symmetric so it's very very important to characterize that so this one is the one where we did that top bottom left uh is x clear the one where we use the captions to build the graph
[01:21:50] uh the bottom right is one that we put recently just to summarize a bit all those findings uh you can see online and the top right is interesting it's a way to say because it's so so much cheaper to specify pair wise relationship you can do very cheap active learning by asking people to you know fill this graph versus describe the full the full label so yeah a few things okay so the last uh so we have 10 minutes uh left any questions so Great. Uh, and if you have GPU, definitely be ready to train things afterward. Uh, okay. So, the last thing
[01:22:28] I want to mention is, uh, going back to to video and compare to video JPA and dreamer that we saw at the beginning. So, at the beginning, right, we had this dreamer encoder that observed a succession of frames and try to produce an embedding. And then we saw in lower model, we do this by predicting T+1. But we have this action to learn dynamics. But of course, you don't always have actions and sometimes VJA and and dreamer and so on. You want embedding and occodor that can be trained on any any type of video. And so one thing we did recently with Lucas
[01:23:04] with here. So if you have additional question, you can ask him. Uh we did this L va of course by the name you can guess is gonna be using using cig. But it looks again extremely extremely simple because now we have this reliable pre-training objective. So pretty much the only difference with load jar is that now you see multiple frames you still do this you know sort of uh augmentation or invariant specification. So can be with data augmentation can be by dropping patches combination of the two. You will encode those views. So you see there is a top view and the bottom
[01:23:41] view in this case and then you do exactly like lo Japan you want to predict one from the other. So you have this uh invariance prediction loss and you have cigar to prevent collapse. Okay. So does not change anything from before and if you do this again you get uh not only very good performance but also you get performance that uh you get a pre-training solution that is much more flop efficient than those teacher student uh method and so this is really the very beginning I think Vija was like what last week on archive but this is the very beginning of us starting to
[01:24:17] have reliable pre-training solution where we can finally become more sample efficient more flop efficient and actually for the same uh flop budget get much better performance at the previous uh models which were you know very very handcrafted um and and ado and again although the task the pre-training task right looks very simple you just want to predict one view from the other and you have crag so you might think okay maybe you learn something but it's not very rich you can see here on the right that um if you look at the embeddings you learn and you just zero shot try to do a segmentation mask on this and you
[01:24:53] project that in input space you actually get very very rich features. So you see the dog is nicely uh segmented the background the foreground and so you get very rich representation despite you know the patterning objective looking seemingly simple and so this is a very uh interesting you know emergent emergent property and this will only get better from here. So at this point I would say you know CG and this whole LJ preing setup has been validated on image uh video world modeling type of things with action conditioning uh and then many other work
[01:25:30] on you know time series uh financial data as well I don't see anymore but yeah he's doing on financial data stuff. So there is really something uh nice to to study there. So if you get started with for modeling I would say it's a good you know starting point and also the theory is quite nice to look at. So whatever your background is definitely uh definitely good. Uh yeah last thing I want to mention because it's so icy. So you can look at you know pick one reference point and see uh what is the corresponding object and segment that and you do this you know real time on video. So again this is from Louis Vij Japa and this is just you know out of
[01:26:07] the box. So you just do pre-training and then you do this uh zero shot. Great. And this is the reference if you want to see more. Okay. So now the very last thing I want to mention uh yeah. Oh yeah. So uh the prediction task here and cig is applied on the cls token of each of the view. But then to produce those figures like this one for example you will use all the patch embeddings.
[01:26:44] So you don't use just the cls token anymore. But the way you produce this and this one after is really standard way also Dino is doing that. So for example here you will take your patch embeddings you do PCA and then you look at the top three components as RGB you know channels and you can display that and then there's couple of small tricks if you want to increase the resolution and so on but yeah this is like very standard zeroot visualization techniques Um,
[01:27:21] oh no. So training is actually very fast. So uh I mean depend on the compute and so on. But if you have access to even 8 GPU within a day or two you can get meaningful result because during training you get uh very nice flop efficiency because you drop so many mask patches and so training is actually quite quite fast. But yeah, you do need to train at least a little bit to have a meaningful segmentation that looks like this. But then yeah, so if you uh like for this type of image, so you can do this for video like here. If you just have an image, you have tricks of either duplicating the image. That's all you will do. For example, imageet 1k
[01:27:57] classification and thing like this. But this is also what VJA you know that's like standard way to deal with image when you have video P train encoder. Yeah. >> Oh what sorry? >> Oh yeah. So inference will depend on the architecture. So inference we use here the exact same encoder. So if you uh keep the same number of patches inference time will be the same for VJA and us. >> Yeah. So, so what's the vet type? This is not a word model. This is just a
[01:28:33] >> So, it is a video encoder that gives you a very strong embedding Z on which you can learn a predictor action prediction predictor to do world modeling. Yeah. >> No, no, here there is no action. So, this is uh if you think back to uh let's go back to Japa very quickly. So if you think about you know this diagram you will see this whole thing as a first encoder. So it gives you a very strong Z a very strong embedding that describes what what's happened you know in the last 5 seconds and then on top of this you can train a action condition predictor to then do planning and you
[01:29:09] know all your world modeling task. Yeah. So this is just producing an encoder a video encoder. Yeah. >> VJA is very close to previously or VJ. >> Yeah. Yeah it's VJA. Yeah. You can think of it as VJ. Exactly. >> Yeah. Exactly. You learn a general encoder and then later if you have a small data set with actions you can train your predictor on top of it. Yeah. >> Learn both everything in >> Yeah. So log J is the equivalent of I would say JPA. So it's the image version of this. Yeah. Yeah. So JJ is also lo JPA is also producing an encoder. We
[01:29:45] don't use actions you know it's image only. and l model which is the one that you see on the slide here is the one that jointly learns the encoder and the predictor. The common denominator among all of these is uh basically crag and the the prediction loss and then it's a matter of do you have actions or not? Do you train and the encoder and the predictor or just the encoder so those will depend on your application at end. Maybe you don't have access to actions or thing like this. Yeah. Great. Okay. And then uh Okay. So maybe very quickly the limitations uh so the first thing I want to mention is that all
[01:30:21] current models overfeed to vision and single modality. So even things that goes to audio are audio only. But this is not enough for the real world. So this is an example of a paper we did recently where Antony built a wall uh hardware setup he put on his car and drove around Philly. Uh and the takeaway is that for for example for self-driving car video only is not sufficient because when you have bad weather condition or you know weird things going on you just don't have the information in the video even if you have two or three cameras and so you need to learn from multiple uh multiple feeds leader and and so on.
[01:30:57] And so this is just a paper to mention that you know if you can actually measure the reliability of video only world models for self-driving car and you see that at night time you have a huge degradation of performance you need additional sensors but right now there is no pre-training objective JPA base that you know gracefully uh multiple streams of data and so in this paper we just did MA based version and we showed that just because you have access to this extra stream of data even A simple reconstruction based method can actually beat the SOTA VJA vision only method and so I would say another big research
[01:31:35] question is uh to go beyond single modality and really understand how to incorporate those modalities together and there are a lot of research question do you do early fusion late fusion or do you do the prediction task and and so on so this is a big research area Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. So even you know if you just have video leader this you can still find situations where this will not be enough and so that's why even you know two or three modalities is is not
[01:32:12] enough. So you really need a setup that can train multiple modalities at once. uh this we did a very tiny uh step in this direction where we try to uh understand if you have multiple modalities in which direction should you predict do should you do alignment or prediction and turns out it's not an easy question so it depends a lot on the amount of noise you have in each modality the amount of information you have in each modality because those prediction tasks are not symmetric and so in this paper I won't go into the detail but we try to see in toy settings can we give a principle to figure out how to design those
[01:32:48] multimodal JPA prediction task. But this is completely open question. So there is pretty much no paper on this. This one is a very first step. Uh most of the theory in the is in the linear regime. But this is not a trivial question. It's not as simple as saying okay we just predict everything from everything. This can actually degrade performance because some modalities are richer, some are noisier and so it will bottleneck your your embedding if you just do it blindly. So it's a very very big uh research question. Uh the second one thing I want to mention that maybe is very relevant to people doing uh finance. Anyone doing finance here?
[01:33:24] Great. Yes. So when you you see the image I showed before, it's very noiseless and this will be the uh last thing. So we are on time. Uh in practice of course in many setups you have a lot of noise in your data. And if you look at this for not just the image so we have different amount of noise. Of course here it's artificial noise that we add. So left to right you have noisier and noisier image. And if you look only at the red curve for now this is what happen if you do dinov2 out of the box. So you see you have a degradation of performance of course but also the convergence speed is much much much slower now which is a pain because
[01:34:02] already to train those foundation model you need tons of compute but now we are telling you if you have noise you need even more compute you know and the scaling is not is not favorable. If you have uh two times worst SNR, you need like four times more compute and so on. So the scaling is really not friendly to to you. So O2 to resolve this problem. And so uh I mentioned this paper if you're working with noisy data, you can check more details there. But we show that if you have uh access even to synthetic data where you can control the amount of noise, even if it's synthetic, there is a huge benefit in doing uh basically curriculum learning along your
[01:34:39] noise trajectories. And this can brings back bring back the convergence rate of your JPA model that was in the noless setting. And so this is a very interesting setup because it shows there are some cases where it's actually beneficial to have clean also simpler and synthetic data uh because this improve um convergence rate quite a lot. So I just wanted to mention this also because I know a lot of people deal with noisy data. Okay. So last slide. Um if you want to get started uh so first thing go to the repo I mentioned on
[01:35:15] slide two hopefully you will do this so we can have some fun this this afternoon but also you see there's a lot of you know things going around so we have those two libraries at the bottom stable world model stable pre training that provide all the utilities you need you saw before we did this imaget 10 setup in like 100 lines everything included so this is possible because of those libraries so if who don't have your own codebase definitely start with that. Uh it's very very well tested. I use this for all my papers. Uh no one can know push a PR without my consent. So it's not you know AI slope uh at this point.
[01:35:53] So if you want something clean and reliable definitely check those those two libraries. And also, of course, this workshop was recorded. You were here, so maybe you don't need the recording, but we had two past workshops that were focused a bit more on neuroscience, for example, and and robotics. And again, recordings are free and online. So, if you want more background on world models, you can also check those those ones. Uh, and with that, thank you. Uh, I think we're at time, but yeah, I can take some questions now or during the break. and also definitely try to find a GPU so that we can uh train things in the afternoon session and yeah feel free to take time to check the code as well.
[01:36:30] Great. Thanks. Anyone? Maybe one or two quick questions? If not, we have a 30 minute break. Uh then we come back at 11 where Bradford Levy will talk about financial data challenges, evaluation, and training. Thanks.
[02:03:12] Good test. There we go. Hi everyone. >> First of all, thanks for having me, Bradford and the uh center for applied AI. Um my name is Steve Bravo. I'm with Massive and uh again thanks for inviting me out. We are a uh financial data platform which is a developer first and very much focused on democratizing access to market data. Now from you know my genesis and how our founders have started getting access to
[02:03:48] market data through programmatic access can be quite challenging especially when there's different protocols out there and you just want data through like an API or a flat file to run your analysis. So that's what Massive has been built on to be able to make access to market data pretty easily and seamless through very good documentation so we understand what you're uh requesting and how it's going to be delivered to you. Now how do we provide market data and what type of market data is what we're going to talk about today.
[02:04:25] Like I said developer first. So we're thinking restful APIs, websockets, flat files, and more recently MCPS. I'm more of a uh data enthusiast more or less and trying to meet the demand of agentic workflows has been a priority for us. Most recently, we launched uh our support of X42, which allows agents to go out and procure their own market data. And of course we expose that endpoint to make it easier for those folks to get it. So instead of having a uh a subscription set up that workflow
[02:05:04] is solved. Now folks that are interested in this type of data have different use cases and how they engage the platform itself. So some folks are in the API space, some are exploring the flat files and many of our users are just now in the MCP uh connector to claude asking questions, visualizing it for them. They don't have to, you know, download troves of data onto their uh PC or MacBook for that matter. Now, how do we get this data? We are directly connected to the source. So we're looking at level one data from UTP, CTA, the equity SIP. We're also uh
[02:05:43] receiving data directly from Opera as well. For those who are not familiar with Opera, that is the SIP for options. We are not only consuming all of that data but also disseminating it. And anyone who is familiar with options, it's probably the largest financial data set in the world. Very difficult to kind of manage and explore and you know understand the nuances with that. That's where I come from. Funny enough, I was part of Opera, moved over to Massive recently to support the uh commercial initiatives that we have in place to make sure we're
[02:06:19] driving growth and under make sure also folks in the market understand our tools and how to best leverage them. Now, the types of data that we uh support and distribute to to the market are equities. So all US exchanges through level one uh support dark pools OTC options we already talked about full chains tick level history uh indices as well so S&P Dow Jones footsy and more uh as well as currencies and futures futures is our latest offering so we've formed a partnership with CME to
[02:06:55] distribute that through our channels as well which we've uh experienced some pretty interesting growth in that space knowing how perpetual futures futures and these prediction markets are evolving in the industry has been sort of a catalyst to that as well. Very much folks are interested in in the in the future space. Now while the market data can be exciting, we're also very excited about what insights we can get from that data itself. We have a research team who is actively looking at how to use AI to uh
[02:07:33] surface market insights and even create our own proprietary data sets. uh our team has produced a a method of extracting event uh tags from SEC AK filings because one thing that we've noticed with some of our users is that when they get access to troves of data and they aren't equipped with the necessary models and tools to explore that data, their models tend to just get get confused and have no understanding of where to go specifically. So to to address that you know providing some category to SEC filings um even 10ks
[02:08:12] helps these uh models and LLMs explore the data more accurately without having to get confused with all that noise. Now Bradford is going to talk a little bit more about that noise piece in in just a bit but we are you know very much excited about that. Now again thanks everyone for inviting us out here. We are very much enthusiastic about researchers and we want to you know continue to lower the barrier of entry for access to market data. Uh historically uh entities have made it very difficult through protocols and and
[02:08:49] different schemas that you have to piece meal together. We want very much to level it making making sure that everyone understands what they're getting access to how they can get access to and if they're using cursor claw code or any of their you know agentic uh tool of choice they can just point at our documentation and have a firm understanding of how to to access the data and pull what they need. Now before going on to a uh a quick demo of our offerings, you know, any questions, comments, curiosities? Yeah.
[02:09:26] >> Thanks. One early piece that we did see is agents pulling all the data getting confused and very much like hallucinating on what the data is. I spoke to a a colleague you know friend in the industry who you know explored that same concept and was trying to
[02:10:02] replicate a signal that he saw in the industry and the agent in Claude I think he was using Opus at the time he would pull data bring it into memory and then it would just like not understand what it's looking at and say I can't find any signal without him overlaying you know some uh conceptual or I guess like analytics overlay to to make it point it in the right direction more or less. So if you're not telling it to be precise, it will just grab everything. Now from our MCP, we're designed the MCP itself to be token efficient. So it's
[02:10:41] not just pulling all the data by default. It the agent can make that discernment as well. Yeah. Any other questions, comments? Cool. So let me just quickly show for you know visual purposes because I am a kind of a data enthusiast if you may and I like to look at the data more or less just like going rowby row in a way. Uh so for documentation, you know, it's as easy as going to our website massive.com documentation. You get to see really
[02:11:18] quickly how to pull, for example, uh daily ticker bars. We have some pre-built sample queries that you can run and we also have some uh Python packages that you can install as well to pull the data itself. If you're just more inclined to use the endpoint directly, of course, that's fully supported. you have the documentation here to do that yourself. Uh I was I asked a question if is a Jupyter notebook still cool. I'm a big user of them. If you are, of course, you could just create a whole script and and pull the data itself. But uh I like using Jupyter notebooks and
[02:11:56] just to kind of see step by step what I'm pulling, what I'm modeling out. And I just created something really simple to show you folks um how kind of straightforward it is to to pull some data. So uh here very quick you know pulling Nvidia one year of daily bars. Most of this is just tagging more or less and then you know pulling 10 days worth of uh uh trading data. Now this query pulled the last year and just for efficiency perspective I can just run all just to show you know how quickly we
[02:12:32] could just get this done and then graph the daily raw returns. Now we're very much pro lowering the latency and we're as latent as the internet can be. Maybe we'll get more investments in that infrastructure so we can be as fast as our you know colleagues uh elsewhere in the world. But this is uh this is very much the the lowest latency we can get over the internet. Um if you want anything closer you can always come to our data centers and connect directly to us.
[02:13:09] >> The now this is your Jupyter notebooks. We do have uh flat files with uh which Bradford uh you know kindly mentioned is a very good use of exploring the data. We have some quick starter information here on how to uh just pull that in. If you're using uh our clone, we support that. You can just point it to the endpoint, use our clone and start uh pulling data into your environment. I have just racks of hard drives just sitting there with data, you know. Last but not least, and what I'm really
[02:13:45] excited about just because it's changed the way I look at data overall, is our AI tools, our MCPs. If you're using Claude, we have a web MCP connector that you could use it for anything. I'm sort of like a kind of exploratory person as well, just when looking at data. you can uh you can use our web connector and and pull the data into your you know cloud session and be very specific. So you can run something like um using the massive uh MCP pull one year
[02:14:23] of Nvidia and model using JR arch with you know Python archite. >> Uh good call. Well, we just got our usage reset. So, just just saying just saying just saying the sky's is the limit here, >> right? You know, just to, you know, I'll go hi. >> Well, yeah, this is putting me on the spot, but I just want to show showcase
[02:15:01] the massive MCP in in in play. Uh, and >> this is being live streamed to the world, by the way. Yeah, that's cool. >> So, it's found the tools, it's pulling the data. Now, what the model outputs is is left to be said, but it's calling the API and going through that. Now, that's going to take a little while to go through that process of uh submitting its outputs. I ran this already uh earlier today just to see what the shape of the data is. So, I won't bore you with that. That was my kind of uh way to get out of that. and just kind of showing what it would
[02:15:38] look like in, you know, practice. Cool. Any questions with the use case in Claude? I'll go back to see the results in just a second. I'm not expecting anything. I'm just kind of It's just a proof of concept of using it. Yeah. Questions. Sorry.
[02:16:16] using the SM uh the MCP or the API or both we've seen a myriad of you know use cases because we provide market data as well as fundamental data from with a partnership you have financial analyst statements you models like creating an LBO very much like creating factors like so for example I want to look at a specific FMA French model and I can just create that in claude and have my models already living there as a skill and just put
[02:16:52] that as a sort of output uh from like just daily statements market monitoring is pretty popular uh and then on the API side just because we have So it's a very much a developer first platform. We have a ton of folks creating their own dashboards, terminals to powered by that API and websocket just powering that directly. Yeah. So the sky's is the limit of uh you know how creative you can get with uh the market data but itself it can solve a ton of use cases from just ideation to just trade execution.
[02:17:28] We We're not an executor of of trades, by the way. Just pull in the data to to make sure we're on track. Still running, but you're right. Fable was a was a mistake, but gets you the idea. Cool. Any other questions, comments, curiosities? So historically, oh I'm miked. Uh I mean historically academics have used data
[02:18:05] sets like nice tac trading quote. Um >> they oftentimes because the data is quote unquote large even though it's not really that large relative to pabyte scale stuff. >> Um you know they process it using clusters on Wharton research data services stuff like that. Um, I have found that your guys's data is effectively identical to NICTAC in many ways. Do you think your products could help sort of alleviate the burden of working with all the data when you often only care about just like event studies? Like a typical research study in finance
[02:18:43] might be 10,000 observations, narrow window around these like information events. Can can using your guys' stuff kind of help people? That's that's a great call out and that's spec specifically how academics leverage our API specifically our restful API calling specific tickers or universe time frames and then pulling that in a very easy to read uh format and a very easy to set up API. I I mean it was like what 10 lines of code to just pull some data more or less. Whereas with other infrastructures
[02:19:19] or databases, you probably have to figure out what the protocol is, the schema, whatever it is to kind of figure out exactly how to pull the data down. We make it so that you can get everything or you can get some of it or whatever is most meaningful to you at that point. In the advent of LLMs, you can start someplace, tell it to just kind of iterate to figure out like what is the best time frame. Of course, I'm not advocating for overfitting models, but you can, you know, move that and not have to worry about changing your queries or your your schemas as you go through that process.
[02:19:57] So, good call out. Yeah, thank you. That's the beauty of uh restful APIs. a little bit of a history piece because I'm a data nerd at heart when I uh I first heard about Massive Polygon about seven years ago and uh it came through a point where I wanted to venture into algorithmic trading. Now I didn't have the infrastructure. I had a Raspberry Pi and a dream. So pulling data through an API just made it that so that I can do the the workflows I I wanted to achieve
[02:20:33] at such you know low infrastructure cost. Obviously if you're pulling in options data now you probably co be cognizant of what kind of hardware you're running but you know it it could be as dimminist as that. Nice. Now, is if anyone is interested in exploring financial data, exploring the APIs, or have any specific questions that you want to call out to to me, feel free to reach me at uh stevemassive.com. You can always navigate to our website, massive.com if you have any questions that we can,
[02:21:09] you know, help you with. Or you can just pull point your LLM to our website and say, "Answer these questions. Let me know what I need follow-ups on." Cool. So, just on time. Thanks everyone. >> Yes.
[02:21:49] All right. Thank you very much, Stephen. Um, so I'm going to give a quick talk on financial data, kind of expanding on uh what Stephen just talked about. Uh, part of why Stephen is here, you know, there's a lot of different vendors that you could go to for financial markets data. Uh we have been working with Massive uh since before they were called Massive, since back when they were called Polygon. Um and the data sets that I'm going to give I'm going to give you access to today all are kind of
[02:22:25] derived from Massive's data. Um and so um I felt it was you know only fair to uh you know let him give a a talk and and open everyone's eyes to how you might be able to leverage the data in academic research. So, a quick overview of of what I'm going to do. I'm going to talk a little bit about time series forecasting um just to kind of tie everything back to what we've already been um discussing, you know, the past few days and then go into financial markets, why they're a little bit different. Uh I'm I'm originally an engineer and then I um made the questionable decision of
[02:23:02] getting a a PhD in in an econ field. um and as a result was forced to learn the lingo of of economics and I saw a lot of basically common math uh but different English words around that math and so I'm going to try to basically you know present some of the things that we think about in uh financial economics but tie them back to uh words that computer scientists would be more familiar with and then finally we'll do a little hands-on tutorial and an intro to the challenge problem that we're talking about. So uh if we think about time series forecasting you know this is a a very long you know large literature that
[02:23:39] exists around how you uh try to do forecasting. Um the more recent developments you know I think uh the term foundation model and language really caught on and people started saying oh we need a foundation model for for time series. Um and so now there's a bunch of them. Times FM was the first one to pop out. I think a couple days ago, Google announced Times FM4, so they're on like their fourth version. Uh, Kronos is from Amazon. I think the latest version is Kronos 2. Uh, Sundial, I think it's Alibaba. Um, but it's it's it's from a Chinese lab. Um, you know,
[02:24:16] these are all very good models. I think the the typical approach is you it's kind of like language, but you just go out and you get all the different time series you could possibly get. So, electricity grid uh demands, you know, traffic, weather, uh dynamic systems. So, uh if if you have a mechanical engineering or electrical engineering background, you're probably familiar with spring mass damper systems or um you know, uh inductors, capacitors, and resistors. You know, these circuits that you uh put together, all of those things have dynamics. Uh you know, there's there's time series. there's a state uh
[02:24:53] that you can observe and the system evolves over time based on inputs and the the systems properties itself. Um so you could collect time series data you know sensor data from those things. It could be very basic like a P controller uh you know controlling the temperature in this room or if you're familiar with the Harper Center failing to control the temperature in the room um all the way up to very complex systems such as F1 cars. So, if you think about, you know, what happens when an F1 car is going around a track, there's a gazillion different sensors on all different parts of the car measuring how the chassis is straining. Um, and you know, they're
[02:25:29] analyzing all that information to to understand just how close to the limit, uh, you know, each of the components are. Uh, and then of course, you know, we can generate synthetic data as well. Um, you know, some of the the talks we've been seeing on world models involve these kind of synthetic worlds. uh and so you could you could collect data from that as well. Um I think the underlying assumption here is that there are commonalities across these different domains uh where if you train a big model a foundation model on them that it will inherently learn the commonalities. Um so if we think about the dynamic
[02:26:06] systems like there are closed form solutions to the ODEs that govern many govern many of them um and ultimately the solutions just depend on like a single parameter or a couple different parameters um and so you could imagine learning how to solve a class of ODEs and so long as you can kind of infer that parameter then you can solve you know a bunch of different dynamics um so that's kind of the hope there to give an example of this if we think about electricity demand And we want to forecast electricity demand. What do what do you all think? Do you do you think that that's a relatively easy
[02:26:42] problem? Maybe it's really hard. I see some people nodding. Yes. Okay. What What might you do if you had to forecast? I guess you guys aren't miked up. I'm not used to being uh in a classroom with the students not miked, but you Yeah. So if we look at this, you know, like day one looks kind of like day two. Um day three, is it going to be similar? Possibly. Um so you could think of just sort of saying, all right, there's going to be this cycle and it repeats every 24 hours. So just take, you know, the average that happens during a a particular time period t, you
[02:27:20] know, modulo uh 24, whatever your your your uh frequency is, and you kind of just, you know, get what's expected. Um maybe you have some information about what's happening on a specific date. Maybe there's like a date fixed effect like we know there's going to be a heat wave so as a result there's going to be more demand for energy to run uh you know air conditioning things like that. Maybe there's a sporting event something like that. Um and you can introduce this. So if you think about forecasting electricity demand which is you know one of the things that these foundation models are are applied to it seems pretty reasonable that you could use the
[02:27:56] past to predict the future. Um oh yes so uh thinking about this time series forecasting you know in these domains uh the past it's a decent predictor of the future uh to put this in more formal terms you know basically there is some mutual information uh between the past and the future or between two different time periods. So uh you know this I here is in the information operator uh and between these two different states uh you know it's it's nonzero between them. So if we start thinking about financial
[02:28:32] markets um I'm I'm older so I've I've seen a thing or two in uh in in my day. Um, you know, I I remember being at Amazon and I had all these computer science uh colleagues around me and and engineers that um, you know, I worked with and they liked to dabble in the markets. They like wanted to trade. And I think the dream there was that, you know, they knew they were very smart and capable and so they were like, you know, if I apply my skills, I can, you know, identify assets that are either undervalued or overvalued and then I can go to this market and there's
[02:29:08] not really any gatekeeping. Um, you know, maybe you, if you're a retail person, maybe you have to buy uh through a broker like Robin Hood or Schwab, um, who's selling your order flow to a market maker. Um, but for the most part, you can just go and buy and sell these assets as you please. Uh, and so, you know, I think the dream across, you know, not just my computer science colleagues, but but kind of anybody here is that, um, I can go to the market, I can use my skills, and I can make money. Um it's sort of, you know, the the American dream um put into an institution. Um
[02:29:44] so let's say you do that. You identify this asset, it's mispriced, and you say, "I'm going to, you know, I'm waking up. Let's make some money today." You go to the market and you trade. What happens? Do you pay? >> You lose money most of the time. Okay. Well, that I maybe you do. Uh I I'm I'm a Chicago professor, so I think I'm contractually obligated to say that uh you shouldn't actually lose money. Maybe you lose your trading costs, but it
[02:30:20] shouldn't be possible for you to systematically uh do worse because if you're systematically doing worse than than the market, then just do the opposite, right? Multiply by minus one. Um, but yeah, you know, generally speaking, we don't we don't really make money. But let's say that you genuinely identified a mispriced asset. You went there and you traded. The market's going to change. You interacting with the market. Now all of a sudden, the market is impounding that information that you discovered. Uh, and so it's changing and it's adapting. And this is quite a bit different than, you know, many of the environments we've been talking about thus far at the workshop. So, you know, in robotics, uh,
[02:30:58] you know, we we saw I think one of the most frequent environments that was put up on slides was the the push t, uh, environment where, you know, there's, you know, above camera view and there's this little T object that you've got to push with just a single point of contact to get it lined up. Um, you know, imagine if the the friction coefficient in that environment was like adversarially changing to try to mess with the robot. you know that that's more of the type of environment that we're dealing with uh in financial markets. And so we have to deal with this challenge um that you know it's the market's constantly
[02:31:34] changing. Um what worked yesterday might not work tomorrow for a variety of different different reasons. Um and this is this is like a pretty old idea. And so to try to connect this back to computer science um there's this thing called the rational expectations equilibrium. You know you make a bunch of different assumptions. I'm not going to comment on whether they're super strong or not. Um, but basically suppose there's some asset that has a terminal value V. Uh, and there's a bunch of different traders out there and they each get private signals about what V is going to be at the end of the period, right? So, this can kind of be like you
[02:32:11] go out, you do your independent analysis, and you think, you know, you have a forecast of what V is going to be, and as a result, you either think that the assets underpriced or overpriced based on the current price today. Um, and you're going to go and trade. Um, and so, you know, the price of that asset, uh, the thing to keep in mind is that it's it's going to be an equilibrium outcome that's a result of these signals and people's trading, people's demand for the asset based on their signals and the current price. And so, Exante, which is just a fancy word for before um you know, so before you trade your the mutual information between your
[02:32:49] signal and terminal value, it could be positive. So, you really could have some ability to forecast that terminal value, but then expost. So, after trading, all that information is impounded. And if you just had price alone, which you do because it's this publicly observable thing that anybody can look at, there is no longer any value to your signal. And so this is kind of the crux of uh the problem that we're going to be dealing with here. Um and you'll see in you know the challenge problem that I give you uh we're going to put sort of prediction as as like the
[02:33:26] hardest level of things because you know in general we sort of expect uh you know the value of information to decay over time. Um and this is um you know I was talking to one of the other organizers about this the other night uh XY and he was like well this is something like surely we can empirically measure this right and like test this um and indeed we can. So if we take a bunch of different uh time series foundation models we can look at the mutual information um between the representations across time um in different domains. So for example, if
[02:34:02] you know we take yesterday's electricity uh demand curve, we push it through a time series foundation model, we extract a representation of it. Um and then we put today's through and we compare the mutual information between those uh two representations. We can see that it's it's you know it's not zero. It's it's relatively high. Um depending on the time series model and the domain, you have more or less uh mutual information between the representations. But then once we get all the way over to to finance um it's it's marketkedly lower relative to all the other domains. Yes.
[02:34:38] >> If you feel value so the weather what's the true value electricity what's the value? >> So these are based on time on the actual like revealed time series. So using archival data and then there's a a mutual uh mutual information estimation uh technique called smile that we use to estimate these >> you justify a different I mean the buyers get your price >> so so these are publicly available data sets and so let's say you have a you know historical time series of of electricity demand it's as simple as
[02:35:14] just you know chunk that up into time periods pass it through through the time series foundation model, extract the representation um that you get and then and then apply the mutual information estimation technique. Um and so you know indeed there's something different about finance. It's it's a little bit harder uh potentially and so we would have to maybe use different methods. Um is the mutual information zero? No. Right? Like we see we see that it's non zero here. Um there's a a seminal paper by Grossman and Stiglets uh and
[02:35:51] basically what they show is that if if information is costly then people endogenously uh choose to become informed. So they look at the cost to buy the information they look at the benefit that they expect to get and then they weigh that uh you know cost against the benefit and so only a fraction of the population chooses to become informed and as a result uh you know price does not fully reveal all the private information. So this result that oops that I was pointing to here where you know basically expost prices a sufficient statistic of all of the information signals. That's not
[02:36:27] really the case. So there's still uh some noise there. Um but the way to think about this is that uh the market is is efficiently inefficient. So, uh, to the ex, you know, by the time that the the information is priced in, it's not really worth it to trade anymore because the costs of of doing so would outweigh the benefit. Um, and so, you know, along these lines, there's a lot of empirical work out there that shows that there's times of predictability. Um, you know, there's various different anomalies. I think one of the the most robust ones has been postearnings announcement drift. So when a firm announces their earnings, they announce
[02:37:03] all this different information and it it seems like the market doesn't fully understand everything. It takes a little while uh for it to be fully priced. Um there's also like the acrruels anomaly, things like that uh that will get me fired by, you know, mentioning them here at Chicago. I guess you're a CS audience, so you might not get this, but Chicago is very very much so historically about uh efficient markets. So that's why I keep making jokes that aren't funny. Um so you know the idea is that yes there might be times of of predictability but if you just pick a random stock hour for the most part that's going to be you
[02:37:39] know a relatively efficient time period uh you know my my colleague Deng uh he has you know some a lot of work actually on you know the pricing of news information um and he generally finds you know like that that that news is priced certainly less than weeks In terms of the time scale, generally it's hours or days. Um, so you know, things are are priced pretty quickly. And this is what they mean or what people mean when they say that financial data are noisy. Uh, basically the the periods during which you have a strong signal about what's going to happen with with the asset
[02:38:15] price, they're comparatively rare. Um so so thinking about this world that we live in with very noisy asset prices um generally the way we think about this uh or more modern thinking I guess um is that the price the assets are being priced by some sort of factor model um and so again to try to connect this back to something that we think about in computer science we have the return on an asset over some time period being a function of mainly this f. So this F is a latent structure. Um they like latent
[02:38:51] risk factors. Um and each asset has some factor loadings beta on that F. Um and that F is a stochastic uh variable generally. So you know the extreme view would be that it's completely unpredictable. Um you know like every single realization is basically liberation day. uh you know, I guess some people predicted that, but you know, things like that, just very very shocking events that occur uh and surprise everyone that are difficult to to forecast. And so, as a result, you know, asset prices, they're moving around for a reason, but it's difficult to predict Exante um that why they're
[02:39:28] going to move and how they're going to move. Um generally speaking, we don't really know what F is. Um raise your hand if you're familiar with the CAPM, the capital asset pricing model. Okay, I not everyone uh but basically you know in that model uh the main risk factor of interest is is the market itself. Um you know there's been a bunch of other work that's followed on to try to identify other risk factors things like that. Um but we might want to just learn what our F is here uh without having to kind of put forth lots of
[02:40:04] hypotheses and test them. Maybe we just want to you know learn from the data, let the data speak. And so enter world modeling. >> Yes. >> Factor following factor seems to be already a lot of factor has already been well known. >> Yeah. So this is a great point um that Han has bring up. So for instance um you know the CAPM has the market factor. um the the three-factor model for instance um FMA and French they put forth they said you know maybe there's a risk
[02:40:40] premium on uh firms of different sizes um there's not really a strong theory like empirically it seems like there is a risk premium um based on firm size but there's not a strong theory for why that might be or I should I should be careful what I'm saying there's probably theories about that um but it's not as as strong as as we would like and so generally speaking the factor models when here like a three factor or a six factor or sorry a five factor or five factor plus momentum which would be like a six factor model. Um there aren't necessarily like super super strong
[02:41:16] micro foundations for why why those would exist. Um and then there there's definitely work that has been done to try to just learn the latent structure different statistical techniques um to to do that. you know this is a world modeling conference so or workshop so what are we going to do try to use uh world models to to learn the latent structure okay so with that there's a little bit of a tutorial um so we can dive into this if if you have your laptop up if you want to go to GitHub uh you can pull the repo
[02:41:54] Randall I'm assuming did you you went through it with them or >> Yeah. Yeah. How to motivate people to check their >> Okay. Well, um so yeah, if you want to if you want to pull this down, what you'll find is there's some code there that we're going to go through. Um the code pulls in some example data that we've assembled from Massive. Um there's also an example world model. Uh if if you were here yesterday and saw my uh Randall and I student Hamza uh present, it's it's one of the Lega models from
[02:42:32] that. It like should have printed out a giant thing that had this You can use the password. >> Uh yes. So the username is W26 is capital W capital and the password is
[02:43:10] world model. Thank you. Okay. So, I will start going through the tutorial. I guess raise your hand if you're actually going to go through the tutorial and you've already downloaded it or you've already gone to the website. Okay. So, some of you raise your hand if you want to do it but you haven't been able to get to it yet. Okay. a couple of you
[02:43:46] give you like 30 more seconds. >> That's correct. Right. >> Yes. Okay. >> It's the entropy. It's the heat.
[02:44:26] about download. >> Gotcha. Um, I mean, if you're super super not technical, which um, you know, certainly people in in my normal classes, there's always a good number of them. I think the wonderful thing today is that you could ask a coding agent to pull it down for you and then start having a natural language conversation with it. Um, that's usually my recommendation anyways. If it asks you for your bank account information, I wouldn't enter it though. That's all.
[02:45:07] Okay. So, I will continue forward. And I'm going to do the thing that I always joke about, which is sharing my screen. So when my mom texts me to tell me that she loves me and that she made me uh a peanut butter j and jelly sandwich without any crusts, you all will get to see that. Um, okay. So I have pulled down the
[02:45:43] repository and make this a little bit bigger so you can kind of see it. Um so the main thing of interest here is going to be under notebooks. So if you go to notebooks uh 01 market jeppa can open that one up. And so there's you know some instructions in the notebook just to kind of describe what we're doing. Um oh I'm sorry jumping ahead. So, as soon as you pull this down,
[02:46:21] you will want to actually install the dependencies to be able to um like actually run the code. The code itself uses UV, which I'm now realizing some of you may not actually use. Uh if if you don't use UV, I would recommend downloading and installing it. It's one of the the better, faster ways to manage uh Python packages these days. Um but basically you could just go into the the repo run uv sync I guess Randall how did you handle package management? >> Uh this is >> okay. >> Okay. Um so this is this will be similar
[02:46:58] to that. Um but you can run u sync. It will install the different packages that you need in order to be able to do the example. Um and then once that runs hopefully it will run relatively quickly for you. um you could run the first cell and so this is where there are a couple of Thank you. This is where there are a couple of um you know assets that are specific to what uh Humza has has put together. Um so this data set ID basically uh Massive Massive eventually is going to be
[02:47:35] hosting the full data set for us. Um it spans, you know, from 2008 until basically uh the end of 2015. Um but we have a a demo from 2019 uh July for you. So you can use that. And then the model ID itself, we just have this demo encoder. So this is an encoder that uh was trained using lega. And I'll I'll show you exactly how in just a second. Not sure why this is taking so long.
[02:48:39] Thank you, XY. >> I know. I was I was staring at that thinking, "Oh, I should have made it shorter." >> Can you add the UV sync, too, so that >> Yeah. Um I mean, I can't make it that friendly, otherwise you guys will erode my trading profits. So, um, okay. So, the next cell will actually start to pull down the data. So, the data itself is a few gigabytes. Um, but we've set it up so that it can be streamed. So, you
[02:49:15] don't actually have to download the whole thing uh right away. You just have to download a few partitions. So, it usually takes about 30 seconds to do that and then uh get it ready to work with. Um, so if you run this this next cell, uh, you might get a warning that says, you know, you're sending unauthenticated requests to to HuggingFace Hub. I just haven't set up the HuggingFace token because I wanted to intentionally check that you didn't need to do that. U, but once you pull it down, this is what the data looks like. Um, so you know, just in a tabular format, we have a few different features. Uh, we have the bid price, we have the ask price, we have bid sizes and ask sizes. So, some of you may not
[02:49:52] be familiar with um with financial markets, but but basically when you go to buy and sell a stock, um what's happening is that there's an order book on the exchange uh or exchanges, and there are people that have shown up that say, "Hey, you know, I'm willing to sell, you know, some number of shares of stock at this price, and there's other people that are saying, I'm willing to buy this many shares at at this price." Um and so that's what these, you know, bid and and asks are. And so when you go to buy a stock, if you're actually going to an exchange and not having your order flow through flow through a market maker, you know, those orders which are
[02:50:28] uh called top of book orders are the ones that you would be potentially interacting with. Um I think Edido yesterday was raising some of the complexities which is that there's other non-dised orders that might be sitting there resting on the uh exchange that you're not aware of so on and so on. But that's kind of, you know, how a centralized limit order book generally works. Um, and then when there's actually trades that come through and happen, you have volume, uh, things, things like that. And so rather than just look at this in a table, we can we can plot it. Uh, and so if we plot this, what we see is that there's a period of
[02:51:04] time um, you know, so this is like a full day's worth of data. There's a period of time where it seems like there's a lot of activity and then there's these two other periods where there's basically nothing happening. Those are basically outside of regular hours trading. Um, so the data itself has everything. So if you wanted to study what's happening, you know, pre-market or aftermarket, um, you can do that. Normal regular market hours are from 9:30 to 400 p.m. Eastern. Um, and so that's where, you know, a lot of the action happens. Uh, we can zoom in specifically to look at that time period. And, and here we go. So here is
[02:51:42] kind of you know a single price trace throughout the day um for uh a given stock. Any questions or seems good. Okay. Um so we can see this time series um you know it doesn't really look like it has much structure. So we think about kind of that factor model stochastic nature. You know things are happening uh in the markets that shift the asset prices around. They're largely random. Um does anyone here is
[02:52:20] anyone here a big fan of technical analysis? Random. Okay. and Stephen I mean so technical analy >> so technical analysis is the uh I guess I will call it the art of uh you know looking at these plots and seeing things like iron condors and golden dragons and not I I don't mean to offend you guys but uh you know seeing seeing patterns um in the data um and so if we I think back to you know typical
[02:52:59] Jeepa training um did you do global and local views or anything like that in your >> uh yeah >> example okay um so you know typically when we're trying to learn a representation of something uh we're trying to use the invariance loss to push together you know representations that should be similar um so you could think about this if I have you know an image of the same cat but from slightly different angles or I have local crops of the cat you know uh image so the you know smaller uh non full image crops then the representations that I get by
[02:53:36] passing those images through my encoder should be in a similar space in the representation space um and so what we're going to do is try to think about what are the kind of analogous augmentations um for time series domains so in the computer vision domain I would say it's you know relatively straightforward. You kind of do these crops of the images. Maybe you add noise to the image like solarizing uh the image, things like that. In time series, uh it's not quite as clear what we should do. Um so the first the first thing that we do is something called random resized crop. So that's kind of a
[02:54:13] standard augmentation in the computer vision literature where you just, you know, crop a different part of the image. Uh you take a certain amount of it. Maybe you say I want my crop to be 60% of the image or I'm going to have a local view that's only, you know, like 30% of the image. Uh, and you just grab that from some random portion of of the image and then uh scale it to be the right size and and start passing it through your model. So, we could do something similar uh where we just take random parts of our time series um and then basically aggregate them so they're the same length and now we have these different views. So that's what we have
[02:54:50] right here. Um so views one and two. So uh blue and orange these are global views. Um so these are you know relatively large crops from the full time series above here. Oops. And then we have local views uh which are the green and red ones which are you know more zoomed in. So you can see the dynamics uh you know for the local views seem to be maybe not as all over the place as as the uh global ones. So if we think about this, we're not we don't care at all in these views about
[02:55:26] time. So they're coming from potentially different periods of time. What sort of invariance would a model that's been trained like this learn if we have our risk factor structure where the return is some factor loadings on these factors that are time-sp specific. We have some noise being added. Do you think we could learn the latent factor
[02:56:04] structure structure, excuse me? Well, so if if if we think about what we're doing here, if we we've taken these views from completely different time periods, that means that view one, the factors that are driving the asset returns are going to be at a different time period than the second view. So whatever the model learns, the in the invariance has to be relatively timeindependent, right? So if we were to train with this augmentation, we wouldn't necessarily be
[02:56:41] able to actually learn the latent factor structure that perhaps we're interested in. But if there are timeindependent factors or I shouldn't let's say time independent characteristics of the asset. So for example um the spread of the of the bid ask spread of the asset tends to be a certain level or the size the distribution of the bid and the ask sizes the order sizes tend to be uh relatively stable over time then training a model a world model with this invariance where we're sampling views
[02:57:17] from different time periods you could potentially learn that in your encoder but by sampling in this you know different time periods you're not necessarily ly going to be able to learn that latent factor structure because the factor realizations which are stochastic literally came from different time periods. So this was uh you know the the augmentation I would say that was most akin to what is traditionally done in the computer vision literature. So that was the you know kind of first thing that we tried. Uh and indeed while we were messing around with it we saw this you know sort of it's sort of obvious exposed oh of course like you're not
[02:57:54] going to be able to learn a latent factor structure this way you're just going to focus on these assets that are rel or these characteristics of the asset that are relatively time uh independent. Um and that was what uh the self-supervised methods seem to learn using this this augmentation. So the next one that we have is is cross stock. So the idea with this cross stock um is that hold the time period constant. So you know maybe it's 10:00 a.m. to 11:45 on Tuesday. Um we're going to take that time period but now we're going to sample Nvidia and Apple
[02:58:32] and we're going to apply the invariance loss there. So again the representations of those two different uh stocks have to be close to one another in representation space. Now, right, it's the same exact time period. If there's common factors that drive both Apple uh and Nvidia, then the model could learn that. All right, so now the model might be able to start learning the latent factor structure. So that's this uh we call it cross cross stock augmentation. Um the next one that we looked into, we call it time warping. Um so this is
[02:59:09] actually something that is done in training foundation models already. So the idea here is that the time period is again the same uh but the rate at which time advances changes over the day. Um so the way to think about this oops so maybe we have the actual you know the actual advancement of time um and then we have the time uh let's say in the representation or I guess maybe the crop
[02:59:46] is a better word um if we just have a 45deree dashed line then every single time or every single second that advances in real time also advances you know in the crop. So the clock is just a normal clock that's moving forward. You don't have anything weird happening. Uh with time warping what you end up doing is sometimes you run faster than real time, sometimes you run slower and so on. Okay, so that's the idea here is that within the day you're squeezing and stretching how quickly uh time is
[03:00:22] progressing. Frankly, I thought that this was like kind of a weird thing to do because we generally think of the time series or financial market time series as like having some economic structure even though it's noisy. Um, and so we sort of thought, well, if you start doing this time warping, then maybe you're going to destroy all of that uh structure where, you know, people aren't just necessarily submitting trades at random, but they're actually uh intentionally submitted when they are. Uh, what we found though is actually this this works quite well. So the final encoder that I'm going to give you guys uh to play with, it was trained
[03:00:58] using this this time warping augmentation. Um so take you know crop uh from or crop crop a given stock to a certain time window and then apply this uh augmentation to the clocks so that the thing runs faster or slower throughout the day >> it work based on volume or >> nope it's it's just purely a drift process right now but so you you could have it be more of a function of what's happening there um and in In fact, there's a gentleman I was speaking with yesterday that that does some high
[03:01:34] frequency stuff and he was saying, you know, another type of augmentation that'd be interesting would be to put it into tick time. So, there's something called a tick, which basically means something actually happened in the market. Um, so if we scroll all the way back up to our first day here, you know, there's lots of time, like clock time that passes after regular hours where nothing is happening. uh we see that you know there was some sort of a trade here. So when something does happen it's called a tick. So like something changed in the order book or in the the trade stream. Um and so rather than having real you
[03:02:13] know clock time passing here the next event would be as soon as when as soon as there was a tick. Um so that would be another augmentation that we could play with. Randall. >> So just to get your intuition for the time warping case, do you think what happens there will become invariant to the high frequency and this sort of way of the low frequencies? >> Yeah. And if yes uh you think this matter depending on what you want to trade like you think it's focused towards more frequency trading or it's always good to have this but no
[03:02:51] matter >> oh for all applications. Yeah. So I think one of the next things for us to do is to look into how it changes the performance on other downstream tasks because perhaps it it is tilting it toward towards one thing or another. Um us finding that this works better. I'm saying that based on return prediction. So it is it is more helpful for return prediction. Um from some interpretability stuff it seems like it's it's forcing the model to focus more on volume. Um and so I think it is learning to kind of smooth out the noise and the the price series and focus more
[03:03:28] on on volume. Um but yeah there I think we can do more to to understand exactly what the the implications are for the final representation quality. Um, and I I should also note that while the encoder I'm giving you is based purely on this time warping augmentation, you know, in the computer vision literature, generally they stack all these different augmentations together and they're probabilistically choosing to do one versus another. You know, you look at it and it's sort of shocking that it even works. Um, but it does. Um, and so it, you know, it's doesn't necessarily need to be the case that these are mutually
[03:04:05] exclusive from one another. Um the next augmentation um kind of staying in the vein of the computer vision literature is Gaussian noise. So you know literally just taking the the time series that we have uh you know drawing gausian noise and adding it to the series. Uh this was super super naive. So if you think about a limit order book, the people that are bidding to buy stock at a particular price, the people that are uh you know putting stock on offer at a given ask, if those two levels ever cross one another, it means that they should trade with one another. And so
[03:04:41] when we add this noise and and if they do go like that, it's something called the locked book. If um you know, trade doesn't actually occur. So the noise that we're adding does kind of destroy that structure, the classic structure of a market where we would expect people to trade with one another because if there's a region, I think the technical term is a zone of possible agreement. If there's a zone of possible agreement where two people say yes, I'm willing to trade at these prices and you know the biders are bidding higher than the sellers are are saying that they'll take, then those people should trade with one another. Um so we're destroying that structure. Um, we find that this
[03:05:20] maybe is kind of works, but uh it doesn't doesn't work that well. Uh, we have volume noise. Uh, that's similar sort of thing, but adding to volume. Um, and then we also have a a price jitter one, which was meant to try to not be quite as aggressive uh in messing with the prices. And then finally, um, kind of just dropping channels. So in in our case um you could think of an image you generally have two spatial dimensions height and width and then you have uh you know a channel dimension uh a
[03:05:56] typical red green blue image would have you know three different channels there. Um in our case we have basically a temporal dimension and then we have a single spatial dimension and then we have these different channels of uh the prices, the sizes, things like that. And so you could just drop channels and get the model uh to be a little bit more robust and not have to rely purely on a single thing like price or volume um to learn the invariance. Um, so that's kind of the last augmentation or an intro in an introduction to the augmentations that we're doing and how we're training them.
[03:06:33] Um, this final cell right here will actually pull from hugging face uh the model. So this model ID was set at the top of the notebook to include this encoder. Uh, any of you should be able to to download it. Um, and then once you have this, you can basically pass market data through it and create representations. So it's a it's a pretty lightweight encoder. Um but that's what this this final step does. Um and you know pass it through uh get a representation of that that time series and then you can do things with it. Um the
[03:07:13] I won't I guess I don't have an example of it. I meant to have an example of it. Um but effectively what we're doing when we're we're applying this world model, right? we have maybe tens of thousands. So in a given day you typically have 23 in during regular market hours you have 23,400 seconds. Um, and so we have, you know, nine different features here. You have, you know, well over a 100,000 different time, uh, points and we're passing that through an encoder if you're doing it at the daily level and, um, aggregating it down to, you know, a much denser embedding, maybe 384 dimension instead of that well over
[03:07:50] 100,000. Um, one thing that I was really excited about when I started learning about, you know, the SSL literature and things is that historically we do this aggregation, right? So, I just mentioned 23,400 seconds. How many of you who do market stuff look at 1 second aggregates? None of you. How many look at minute aggregates? Okay, one. How about five minute aggregates? How about daily? Okay, more. Right. So like like historically we have
[03:08:26] aggregated market data and the rule that we apply to do this aggregation is is open high low close. So within a given time period we ask ourselves what was the starting price at the start of the a of the interval what was the high what was the low and what was the closing price. We ask you know how much volume was traded. Um, and so we have this aggregation rule which, you know, I'm I'm Wharton trained, so you know, all observed behavior is is optimal. So I guess that aggregation rule must be optimal. Um, but it seems a little goofy to me. Um and so one of the cool things about this
[03:09:02] um you know SSL literature is that maybe we can learn a different aggregation rule uh which is a little bit focused a little more focused on what we actually care about um as opposed to just kind of you know aggregating every single time interval the same exact way when you know clearly not all time intervals are are created equal in terms of predictivity. Um so that is uh the intro han model
[03:09:38] about JSON. >> Okay, >> that's 100% after that just 0%. >> So, so let let's give it a try or give it a minute to see. Uh I know sometimes in Glee here that the Wi-Fi can be kind of annoying. Um but yeah, let's let's hope it resolves it itself. Um so with that, I will jump back to my slides. Um and so now to talk a little bit about the the challenge. So we provided you with this encoder. Uh it was trained on data from 2016. So you know it's it's
[03:10:16] prior to 2019. Um and so there's a sample of data uh on hugging face uh from 2019 through 2020. Uh we call this you know market onet. Uh the idea here is that we're making this data set available. It has over a trillion uh one second aggregates in it. Um so it's it's quite large. Our hope is that you know this will spur a bunch of uh you know supervised and self-supervised uh learning uh work or research on a common finance data set uh with kind of common benchmarks and things. Um, so for the challenge, you can go ahead, you could pull this data down if you're interested
[03:10:53] in, you know, messing around with this model. Um, on on some finance data, uh, and some ideas for things, uh, that you could do. I'm going to kind of go from, I think, what is like the most promising to the hardest. Um, so for instance, you could take this encoder uh, and you could use it to assess uh, the risk that's inherent in different assets. So from the paper that Hamza presented, we know for sure some latent stuff about risk is being coded. Um and so you know you could go and and ask yourself, okay, when liberation day occurred,
[03:11:30] it didn't affect all um you know assets. Similarly, some firms were more exposed to tariffs in certain countries uh you know in negative or positive ways, things like that. So you could encode uh you know the market data from the day after I guess we don't have liberation day in the sample but you could go to COVID we have COVID in the sample um and plug of my own research here I have a a Stanford case study uh on COVID and the we called it the spread of COVID disclosure. Um Starbucks was one of the first firms to uh announce that COVID
[03:12:07] was probably going to be a problem. Um, and it actually happened fairly early uh in 2020. Actually, it may have been late 2019. Um, but anyways, it was before everything locked down. And so, you could go and look at some of those days and see like which firm when when Starbucks said this, you know, which firms uh actually reacted and and how did they react, things like that. Uh, if you're interested in regulation, um, you know, market manipulation is a big deal. Uh if you are doing things like spoofing, that is uh illegal. And spoofing is when you just you put uh
[03:12:43] orders on the order book that make other market participants think that the stock is going to trade in a specific direction. Uh even though you never intend to actually execute those, instead you're actually doing the you're trying to unload a position or you're trying to build a position. U and so that's illegal. uh we know from our paper that you can identify like there's a signature um where you can use these models to identify those periods of manipulation. So that would be something you could try playing around with. And then finally, you know, if you're really really ambitious and you you want to go out there uh and and make some money, then you know, maybe you can uh apply
[03:13:19] the model, try to separate, you know, the signal from the noise uh and see if you can identify periods of of persistent predictability. >> Yes. Is there restriction on your checkpoint? Is it to make money? >> No, it's MIT license. Um, yeah, I guess we could we could discuss that. I mean, it's your checkpoint as well, Randall. >> Yes.
[03:13:56] >> Validates the whole purpose of developing such in the first place then if all that information >> what what is your background >> okay you you you might enjoy reading Grossman Stigulas or at least talking to an AI model about Grossman Stigulus 1980 so this is the paradox and the the uh you know impossibility of of perfectly efficient uh markets so if this thing works people will start to use it, markets will become more efficient. The actual trading profits that you can earn
[03:14:32] from using the model will decline. Um, and so, you know, you the market will become more efficient, but not perfectly efficient. Um, because, you know, now it's it's cheaper to impound all the information into prices. Um, but it's still not zero, right? You got to run this on a GPU. You've got to purchase Massive's data or someone else's and things like that. And so, um, the market will become more efficient. It'll still be, you know, the marginal cost of of doing it and running it, uh, may still be, um, less than the benefit for some of the informed people, quote unquote informed people who are running the
[03:15:08] model. Um, but yeah, this is kind of coming full circle back to my initial point about markets and how they're a little bit different. Quick question for the for the word model that purely use equity the market data only the tree. >> Correct. So it it uses this data uh right here which is uh basically the top of book order features. So what is the best bid the best ask uh and the sizes that are associated with those. Um what >> years of data have been used. >> So this particular model is a single
[03:15:45] month 2016. Um and we well what we find is that like the model is actually relatively good for a while. Um so it the the performance of it doesn't decay super fast. Uh we do have scaling studies in the model uh or in the paper as well. You know there are benefits kind of not surprisingly to using a bigger model training on more data things like that. the jetpa in action. >> Correct. So this this is you know purely an encoder I would say um and you know there's some things in the end of the paper uh where we basically try to get
[03:16:22] more towards a world model uh where we actually condition on on events and things. Okay. Yes. Um so maximum entropy I think there is a seed at the start of the notebook that samples it. Um so yeah I was not trying to cherrypick anything. Um yeah.
[03:16:59] Okay. Um so I think with that we can close and then uh you know we'll have the the lunch and then then challenge uh work in in the afternoon. So thank you everyone is on the fifth floor like yesterday and we're coming back at 1:30.
[04:20:46] Thanks.
[04:32:59] Hello. >> Hello. >> Hi. Wait. >> Yes, >> I can hear you. >> Perfect. Uh >> um let us get you on the screen first. Um >> good >> we we can hear you. We can't see you. So I think but it's I think it's our on our end. Um thanks for joining us. >> Yeah, sounds good. Yep. Thanks for the
[04:33:36] invitation. >> That's great. We can see you now. >> Awesome. >> Yes. Great. Uh thanks everyone to for coming to the afternoon session. Um, now we have Dr. Amir Zade from Lambda Labs. He is a ML researcher there and he'll be telling us about scaling GPU infrastructures which I guess they specialize in. I'll hand it to you Amir. >> Awesome. Thank you. Um, yeah. So today I sort of want to talk about you know what are the challenges in front of the
[04:34:13] scaling GPU infrastructure and most importantly you know what the future of world modeling and physical AI is going to bring in. Um I kind of want to start with a paper that we recently had in ICML. Um we bas what we did and this is a collaboration with Carnegie Melon between Carnegie Melon and Lambda. We wanted to see if we can solve physics olympiad um you know using synthetic physics data that we can generate with the simulators right so let's say hypothetically you
[04:34:51] have a physics simulator um let's say a mo scene that's being rendered um and essentially you try to have your model learn the physics of the world through the physics simulators Right. And these are the outputs of some of the simulations that you know we have in our training data. Um the goal is is relatively straightforward. Um we want to learn physics uh but we don't want to learn physics from the real world. We want to learn the physics from a digital twin uh as much as we can.
[04:35:28] So the straightforward thing is within the physics simulator, we try to generate procedural scenes, right? So scenes that have certain complexity and then we can essentially build on top of those scenes and add more complexity to them. Then what we can do is we can basically record the data from the simulator. Right? So this is going to be in in a format of like velocity, acceleration um and different forces that are being
[04:36:04] applied to different objects. And based off of this then we will go in and you know generate a scene description and based off of that scene description we generate a question and we generate the answer which you know the LLM is expected to ultimately generate the same outcome as the physics simulator. Um, so this is sort of like doing it without any human involvement because these these descriptions, these scene descriptions, they're being built by
[04:36:41] LLMs as well. Um, so an LLM goes in, puts in a bunch of information into Mojo or whatever physics simulator that you want to use. In this case, we used Moko and it generates the scene inside Moko and then another LLM tries to come in and learn it. Now this can get this the beauty of this is that these scenes can be really difficult to make in the real world. Um so for example a scene like this is is very difficult to make um but ultimately
[04:37:17] very you know straightforward to make in a in a simulator. So that's one of the powers of a simulator is that you know the the sky is the limit as long as you can cover the compute. Now talking about how this makes a difference right um let's say hypothetically we generate the data from the simulator and we try to fine-tune on on say IPO mechanics right um I'm immediately we get a boost out of this this is this is not straightforward right because nobody in the past has
[04:37:54] tried to use like a physics simulator in order to get the actual IPA HO to perform better, right? Um, but essentially in this game of an LLM controlling the Moko and an LLM learning, it seems to be something that does add to the knowledge of physics. And again, this is base models plus all synthetic data added. Um now the gap here some some folks might think oh okay this is like 4% what's what's the big
[04:38:31] deal that that 4% is pretty big right in in the IPO that 4% is is a big difference maker now we we also get boost across different um models that we have so essentially what this means means is that the the knowledge that these data points are essentially creating for us is generalizable across these models. But there's also something a little bit more interesting happening. Um
[04:39:11] we start also doing better on math. So think about that for a second. a physics simulator generating data that makes you do better in math, right? Despite the fact that it was never meant as a as a math thing. Um, now this is this is that sweet effect in simulators that you know you can have correlated frontiers. Um, so now I want to move on to
[04:39:49] this where we're talking about you know like where each of the LLMs lie in this and if you remember the IPO mechanics that we did was around 40%. Right? So we are right up there close to Gemini flash and GPD5 high and these folks they use curated data uh as far as we know and this is interesting because this means that this gap that you're seeing here between this row of Gemini Flash and GPT5 and then the row that's close to like
[04:40:27] between 36 to 38% this human level expert data could be closed with a simulator, right? And this is a very good signal for world modeling as a whole. Um, it means that we are going to be able to use synthetic data in real production setup and that's a really really good signal because synthetic data for the most part has been neglected in ML, right? And one of the things that I'm very passionate
[04:41:03] about is kind of like bring it back to life. So this is I decided to start talk with in order to give us a good idea of like where I personally think the world modeling field is headed. Um the the world of simulators is something that we should really pay attention to, but it's not going to be, you know, all easy going forward.
[04:41:39] I want to talk about three main issues that are ahead of us in the simulation realm. And the biggest umbrella is that there's no playbook or good set of practices for synthetic data generation. Right now you can think about oh like what if I just get behind a a simulator and start generating data. um even if it works on the modeling side,
[04:42:15] there's still a lot of considerations that you have to have on the cost side. And we're going to talk about that. We're going to talk about like, okay, like how do we measure whether or not we're generating meaningful simulations? Um how do we keep our costs low and how do we overcome the barriers of the infrastructure because ultimately we can only generate as fast as our infra allows, right? And we're going to see some interesting things here. So the first thing is how do we measure success? So let's say I have a Unree G1 and I
[04:42:51] just go into Isaac SIM and I'm trying to say improve the gate of this particular brand of robot whenever it's hitting obstacles along its course. Um at the beginning the learning signals are very high meaning that majority of the simulations are yielding important gradients right but as time goes by simulations start giving you diminishing returns right and now the goal becomes how do I hunt down
[04:43:28] those fresh gradients that are hidden among increasingly among you know, gradients that are just no longer helpful in in terms of learning signal. And a lot of these boil down to we we tend to think of these these, you know, whatever playbook or whatever method that we come up with that's universal across different tasks. But the real reality is that there's a lot of task dependent metrics. So a a robot that stands on its legs
[04:44:05] uh is going to be different than a robot that you know has propellers and flies. So these tasks are are not necessarily something that you can say okay like I'm going to maximize for this and I'm always going to get it right. So those metrics really define how well you're using your dollars in terms of simulations. Now, if we want to keep these costs low, right, we have to maximize the right side of this this slide,
[04:44:44] meaning that we have to maximize the learning signals that we're getting, right? Of course, the no- learning signal is still helpful, but at some point is going to be, you know, just feeding your model data that it just, you know, gets in, gets out, nothing changes. So, how do we keep our costs low? And I want to sort of like talk about a real experiment of how these costs will look like. So, let's say you have a B200 GPU, right? I mean, pretty
[04:45:20] state-of-the-art GPU. You pay about, you know, $6 to $7 an hour based off of, you know, whatever day of the month it is or, you know, month of the year it is. I want to answer this question. How many simulation hours do I get for a GPU hour? Right? So if I have an hour on B200, how many simulation hours was I able to generate? Right? And let's say I'm using Isaac sim. We're going to be looking at
[04:45:57] something like this, right? Let's say I have 100,000 environments. 100,000 environments is a reasonable amount for something, you know, getting ready for production. Um I have 1,024 runs per each because you know I want to see how each one of those environments are performing. So I need to find those right trajectories and 1,024 is is not that many in my opinion but you know we're going to go with the current setup and 90 second rollouts. So
[04:46:35] each one of the simulations is going to go for 90 seconds. Um 90 seconds is enough to do relatively, you know, small tasks. It's still, you know, decent horizon. We're not too short. We're not too long. It's a reasonable number. So like each if you look at the first column is going to tell you how many simulation seconds are you going to get per GPU second, right? And the second column is going to tell
[04:47:12] you how many GPU hours in total you're going to need and what the cost is going to look like. So if I put one of these G1s in the simulation inside a warehouse like static shelving racks, pallets, um very minimal things moving and a single G1, right? I'm gonna be getting 100 seconds of simulation each second of GPU runtime, right? And the cost is going to be, you know,
[04:47:50] decently manageable. And how will we generate these scenes? We can have an LLM start talking about like, you know, scene description and then translating that into, you know, Isaac SIM coordinates and put a G1 into it. ask it to do a particular thing and judge whether or not it was able to do it. But if you add a little bit of articulation to this warehouse, suddenly you're half the simulation seconds, right? So your costs double. And then if you add an environment that's a little bit challenging, like
[04:48:26] say for example through rubble or in a forest, right? Then you're even lower. And then if you actually turn on the lighter and camera to do RTX rendering of the scene, you're suddenly around one second of simulation per 1 second of the real world on a B200. And well on this last column is actually not a B200, but comparable it because we have the rendering. So we have to change the GPU. B200 doesn't render. So it's going to be an RTX Pro. um 6,000
[04:49:03] Blackwell and in this same environment setup that we had now we're spending millions, right? And this cost really like starts dominating. And it's not just the cost. It's also about the fact that you're getting almost like a one frame per second situation where you're getting 1 second of simulation per 1 second of GPU runtime. And if you think about it, I mean G1 in a forest plus lighter plus camera. I'm not asking for too much. Um,
[04:49:39] but that's the reality of the simulations is that these are going to be difficult. It's not clear how we can we can scale this up without having to spend a lot of effort and a lot of like money either put into it or effort into figuring out how I can generate those data points that are ultimately going to give me the best outcome. Now in terms of the keeping the costs low
[04:50:16] as a community for world modeling in particular because I think world modeling is going to be very expensive. Uh it's good news for us providers uh of compute but also it brings certain challenging things to the table, right? Certain challenging things that we get to decide as the community of world modeling like how do you do good simulations? How do you generate the best learning signal at any point in time at any given point in time?
[04:50:52] And that's that's not something that's very clear right now. That's not something that I have an answer a clear answer to. I have some answers to, but I don't have any clear answers where I can say, "Okay, I'm going to go write a book and that book is going to define the next 10 years." Um, we need to come up with those those practices as a community. And the reality of the situation is that a lot of us haven't gone there yet to scale up our simulations to such an extent. Then then we're talking about like, okay, I need to spend like $45 million on a G1 being in a forest. How can I break down this
[04:51:29] cost into getting these these same signals in like learning signals or the value of my tokens instead of $5 million, how can I break it down to 500,000? We don't have that kind of thing at the moment. We Some of us have gotten there, some of us have not. Some of us are getting there. We're in different progression of of this problem, but we will ultimately get there because a lot of world modeling cannot actually happen um unless we deploy robots in the real world and and that's going to be having
[04:52:05] its own complexities. So I think simulations for the next five years are going to really really define how the world modeling shapes up. Now besides that there are certain barriers of infrastructure. Um the barriers of infrastructure are also an important part of the entire world modeling ecosystem.
[04:52:41] Um, we're going to need to have nodes that are very high capacity, very high capacity, interconnected to each other. um delays are going to be real meaning that it's not very straightforward right now how we can get maximum throughput out of a rendering GPU into a um data center GPU like B200 right so how do you configure for each simulation the best type of
[04:53:17] connection that's between the compute nodes that you have of two types, right? So, let's say your RTX 6000 is generating data points. Is your B200 getting throttled or is your RTX 6000 getting throttled? At the moment, there's no orchestration that is globally applicable. Um there's no again like there's no playbook on on how to build these clusters the most efficient way possible. And then like you know how many GPUs are you going to put into each one of the
[04:53:54] nodes? These may seem trivial questions like why should we bother with these things? But when you're dealing with like one experiment is costing you $5 million, you really want to break that cost down, right? You like any amount of efficiency that you can add to the system is going to help you break that cost down. Um the other thing, one of the biggest issues that I actually personally think is going to be a big barrier is data. How do you store the data? Um these are not
[04:54:31] particularly smalls size data points, right? You need you need this data to be able to stream to you as you're learning from it. you need to be able to index over this data because if I want to have a particular learning signal now added to the learning signals that I'm interested in, I'm not going to go ahead and regenerate all my simulations and now decide, okay, which one of these now matches my new metric that I defined. I'm going to want to have an index where I can go on my database and say, "Give
[04:55:07] me all the instances where there's a cat crossing the street." Right? You're not going to want to regenerate simulations. You're going to want to stick to the simulations that you have and get more out of that because these these have costed you a lot of money to generate. Now the choice of data as a whole is something that believe me all providers are thinking about at any point in time, right? How do we make it faster for our customers to stream data? How do we make it cheaper for them to just park their data? Um, and how do we make sure that
[04:55:45] their compute nodes are not being throttled down by the data itself? And then there's questions um like for example how frequency how how frequently do we update the weights is is somehow an info question because that's network the amount of gradients that is being passed around is something that you really want to maximize your your outcome despite the fact that you know you have a certain bandwidth of your network. So it's a very very multi-dimensional
[04:56:21] problem that we are going into in the area of world modeling. First, we have barriers of like, how do I even know I'm doing good simulations? Right? If I just put it into my model and calculate a backboard pass and I see, okay, decent gradients, does that even mean anything? Right? Is that a good measure or do we have other measures to make sure that I can look at a pick out a simulation from my simulation pool and say that is a good simulation whereas this one is not a good simulation. Right? So, how do I maximize going for the good ones and
[04:56:58] minimize going for the bad ones, right? And then general description of the scene is going to define what the cost is going to look like. So, a good bias towards, you know, more difficult scenes are probably better learning signals, but then they're also much more expensive as we saw, right? So, A G1 in a 4S plus lighter and camera is going to give you really good learning signals. But remember, for one of those, you could
[04:57:35] generate 100 more simple simulations. So, do you want to come up with some sort of curriculum to make this better? And then the choice of the infra it it matters a lot in that you know how many simulations or how many simulation seconds or how many high value simulation seconds am I getting per dollar. Um and I think as a community we should get to define these things um within the next few years in order to make this a real thing for
[04:58:11] academic research because the type of dollar amount that we're talking about here is is the type of dollar amount that even the industry folks are going to be looking at this and and thinking this is a little bit expensive. So we get to define this within the next few years and I think there's a lot of research needed in order to kind of like play this highdimensional game. But yeah, so I want to end the talk here. I think if anybody has any questions, happy to take them. Um, I
[04:58:49] hope this talk was able to show you down the road what we're going to be dealing with. Um, even in in the simplest of simulations. I wouldn't particularly call a humanoid simulation a simple the simplest of simulations, but it's most certainly not the most difficult one either. And it's a it's a realistic one. And whether or not you're running into this problem today or in 2 years or in 5 years, um we are going to be looking at the digital twins of the real world very
[04:59:25] soon becoming mainstream. >> Great. Uh let's thank Amir. Yeah. Any questions? I have one, but I want to let the Great. So, so Amir, are you still there, by the way? I I hope. Okay, great. Um, >> so you're you've been very kind to kind of point out all these barriers and what needs to be solved before um academics can get their hands on it. And you kind
[05:00:02] of even hinted at this which is as like a provider you guys would benefit if we never solve solve this right like we we pay you more. So like from the perspective of like a Lambda representative uh what is the how could academics and say a provider like Lambda work symbiotically? Um because it seems like if we do better, we're hurting you by not paying you as much, right? Like what what's the symbiosis there? >> Um it's actually the opposite. Meaning
[05:00:39] that as a provider, it's far more lucrative for us. if this becomes mainstream and everybody is successful as opposed to this you know bringing in revenue for one year and then the next year everybody's like I'm never doing this again right so from our perspective being a c customer centered um company we want we want our customers to succeed and the market to grow as opposed to
[05:01:16] having a market that's relatively small and and only a few customers in it. And that's why we really really want this to be defined, this playbook of like, okay, like you're a PhD student and here's Isaac Sim, here's the robot that you need to improve a certain aspect of, right? Very reasonable grant that you could probably get from, you know, NSF, NIH, Department of Defense. What is the first thing that you do, right? Like how do you even start this? Because if you decide not to start it,
[05:01:53] then you know nobody's making the the money from you know the infra providers. Um but then again there's also Lambda's spirit is that we are curious. We are built by researchers, right? Um, for example, our CEO has a Google Scholar. So that curiosity is really what drives a lot of this forward. A lot of this like how can Lambda give back to the community and how can we contribute to
[05:02:29] making things move along in a manner that if we weren't there, they wouldn't be, you know, moving along in in the same quality or as fast as they could. So I hope that answered your question to an extent. >> I see. So so then the a followup would be like you mentioned like your your CEO has a Google scholar, right? So, so what can we do in academia that like you are not in a position to do from the lambda side because clearly you have researchers on your end as well and what
[05:03:05] can you provide that might not be incentivized on our end. Um, I would say the power of academia really comes in from novelty, testing ideas and ultimately like showing the path to being able to like, you know, scale up and being able to show that something like this, like the digital twin is is going to work at the end of the day. And that's we're not in a position at Lambda
[05:03:41] to do that because we don't have that high of a headcount in terms of like you know there are thousands of PhD students interested in world modeling right but there are only a few researchers at Lambda who are essentially like who have identified these problems and are keeping tabs on them. Um I think from from academia it it really boils down to the signal that we receive in terms of like how the next 2 3 years the papers look like um kind of like being watchful
[05:04:20] about like how each one of these problems are being addressed and that's something that Lambda through research grants is hoping to accelerate as well. So for the audience we also have a research grant. So if you go on our website there's a research portion and you can submit a grant and if it is connected to world modeling it very likely will get funded. Um and so that's the way you know we can build that relationship between lambda and academia. >> You've uh for the audience lambda has
[05:04:56] also been very kind and provided a bit of funding for this uh workshop as well. Uh yes. Okay, great. Uh let's thank Amir again. Uh Amir, thank you for joining us this afternoon. >> Yeah, >> definitely. Thank you for having me. Bye >> bye. Bye. Uh so now we have the open working session. So it's our hackathon hours now. Uh everyone you're free to take a little break outside as well. Then we will come back at 4 to hear the presentations to see what you've hacked
[05:05:33] together. Um, and I guess you will do we do we pick winners or but yeah, it would be great to see. Huh. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it will naturally uh I guess it will go natural. Everyone will know who won in their hearts, but it would be no no we we're not like the uh we'll figure out some way. Um but yeah, it would be after the two-hour hackathon, we'll come back and see and then uh Kawwin will give the uh ending
[05:06:09] remarks where he'll sum up the what we've seen over the past three days in a broader landscape of things. Uh Kwin is very is a very good explicator. So I definitely uh he recently had a set of slides go semiviral on Twitter about post training for economics I think. So so he has a very good broad view of the world. So I definitely encourage you to uh stay for that as well. Um with that we have our two-hour hackathon. Thank you.
[05:16:35] Hello. Hello. >> Uh quick quick details for the uh next two hours. So uh as you saw right this morning, we provided a bunch of small uh working examples. uh in theory you should not need a ton of GPUs to run them but you know depending on what you want to do so you can team up with people uh if you want there is no obligation and the goal is that uh you try to experiment with those model whether on the pre-training side or on using a pre-trained checkpoint and trying to see when does it break when doesn't it break what features do they learn you know this type of thing and
[05:17:11] then of course we don't want to put you on the spot so it's going to be volunteer based but if you got uh interesting finding no matter what it is. We will ask if people volunteer to present their finding. You don't need to prepare slides or anything. You know, you don't even need to share your screen. You can just describe what you did and found. But this is what we will do at the end of the two hours session. Okay? And in between that we are here to answer any question you might have. But the goal is really for you to explore and try uh the codebase basically. Did it clear? Yeah. Great. Okay. And if you have other question, just come and and ask us. Thanks.
[07:02:29] Where's the
[07:03:09] If you want right now.
[07:04:05] All right. So, um we are at time officially. Uh so it will be great to hear a bit what everyone tried. So there is no you know pressure to present what worked only. If you try things and it did not work, it's actually pretty useful for others and also for us to know what is the pain point or not. Uh can be whether you know this result did not work or even uh maybe the way let's say this specific method is implemented is not very friendly. any feedback you have basically and then if you tried something whether it's different data set uh visualizing no embeddings that
[07:04:43] you learn or anything and you want to share something uh definitely volunteer and and come so I think we just by a show of end who thinks to present quickly you don't have to share screen you can share screen you know but no no pressure on this you can also just tell us what you tried and if it worked or not so anyone okay so we have one two three. Okay, so we have three at least four. Okay, so I think that's pretty nice. So we can uh start with that and then if we have some times we can do some random sampling. No, just kidding. So yeah, let's start with
[07:05:19] >> Oh, nice. Okay. Okay, Bradford, you go. Okay, awesome. So uh so if you want to share screen, uh this is or you can join the zoom. Uh so feel free to join you know a prior because we need to promote you otherwise yeah whoever wants to come first feel free to come here and uh then you can tell us what you what you tried. So on this we can do random sampling among those four. So do you want to go first? Okay, great.
[07:06:02] >> Nice. >> But does it work for people who already volunteered? >> Oh, okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. But uh hello I don't know you did the contract you know yeah you have to join the zoom here and then you will be promoted as co-host and once you come you can just share your screen directly on zoom yeah so yeah if or anyone who is ready who
[07:06:39] wants to come otherwise we can wait do you have to join zoom oh yeah okay great awesome Yeah. Yeah. And people should feel free to ask questions as well if if they want. Yeah. >> So this was Hi, my name is Amed. Thank you so much professors for this opportunity. I was trying to apply uh our graph model um in the JPA style that on on on the data set we created a new ARM which was again using cigarette but a typeon uh uh features. So instead of all the nine, it was a type only feature that we were trying to do and also a time
[07:07:16] feature that we were trying to encode uh as a separate arm. It didn't work out but we're trying to see uh how to kind of go back to the baseline. I spoke to professor he said some of the things that I assumed were not in there were already used in training. So I'm trying a new strategy and seeing how that goes for them. Thank you. Very expensive.
[07:08:15] Yeah, for me instead of like uh trying comp. >> Yeah. Uh for me, instead of trying uh some of these world models, initially I just wanted to understand better the data. So I was looking at the twopoint autocorrelations and the spectrum and is the hugging face data set. Yeah. So basically uh my idea was to see if I can see some patterns from like raw statistics particularly because I come from a turbulence background like and we do a lot of like twotime
[07:08:51] autocorrelations and spectrum analysis and then based on that like I would probably try the model from Google later. Okay. So I didn't the foundation model the time model. So, so I uh for this I didn't try any foundation model per se, but my plan is to use that and probably use some of the summary statistics to be incorporated into the foundation model inference also. Thank you.
[07:10:27] Hey everyone. I'm Sean. I'm an incoming MBA uh and I'm also a fellow at the Center of Applied AI. So I'm quite excited to be here and thank you for the organizers for doing this. So this was done in like the last 45 minutes. So like um just a heads up on that. So the the thinking is here is this is uh the get-rich it's basically an embedding based approach on whether we can generate returns exploiting market inefficiencies using world models. Um so the hypothesis is this will so given that when we when we have our u world
[07:11:05] model that we used in session two today and it has this embedding of like a given company and the thinking over there is is that can I leverage the nearest neighbors of said given company um and then see how they perform in the future and then take an average of that and then compare it with what the actual state is of the company that I initially had in mind and if there's a significant discrepancy, then there's like an opportunity to hopefully make money. So, that's the that's the hypothesis over here. So, the entire pipeline is like a three-step process. Um, we took I took a
[07:11:41] certain amount of data um and I took like a very small amount of it so that we could get some results um over the last hour. And then the second step is, you know, we take the 10 previous neighbors and all their like previous states. So at D we see where it goes at like t + one and if it's like a significant difference in terms of the cosign similarity then um the goal would be to just like to trade the surprise. So like non non-perure reviewed results but something I thought was like worth sharing on like a very small subset of data which was there were three different strategies which is on what
[07:12:17] you can see on the right side of the page. So you have your mean reversion, your like momentum and breakout strategy and then an always long one. Um I wouldn't take into account the sharp ratio given like the the timeline but it was basically like can we see what the the total return would be with each of these three strategies and on the left hand side is is sort of like what are the inputs going into the model. I think in terms of next steps like the goal would be is one use like a lot more data two would also be like do it over like a longer time period and then three would use like um like a larger model um that
[07:12:56] would be more fine-tuned towards these applications but that's all but yes thank you but yes you have a So I'm taking the So I'm taking the difference between like the like the average of the the neighbors at T+1 with the actual of the company that I
[07:13:32] initially had in mind at T+1 as well and then seeing if there's a difference and I'm using the world model to like predict the future state. So because I'm predicting the future state from that company at hand, I'm like seeing the delta in the cosine with with like using cosine similarity. Yes. Yes. Yes. So that's it. But yes, um yeah,
[07:14:10] >> it already works. I'm getting rich. Uh, so I uh I wanted to train the world model but on Atari Breakout and be able
[07:14:47] to play the world model. So I uh was able to get it kind of working. Um, on the left the ball is moving. on the right. It didn't reconstruct the ball for some reason. Um, possibly because the vision encoder can't see one pixel objects, maybe something like that. Um, but I can move the paddle back and forth and it kind of responds. Left. It's not really responding now, but there it goes. Yeah.
[07:15:25] and it it kind of got the idea that blocks disappear sometimes, but it's kind of confused as well. Uh I think part of the problem there is that the uh the encoder has a 64dimensional latent space and there are more than 64 blocks. Um so I think it needs a larger latent space anyway. Okay,
[07:16:07] uh is it? >> Let me just give a try or
[07:18:03] Great. So, first of all, >> yeah. So, how do I share my screen? I just have to just a second. Okay. Okay.
[07:18:40] Hi everyone. My name is Janing and I am an incoming first year graduate student into the program master of computational social science and I'm really glad to join the workshop and here I took the track of doing the financial data and the war model and I'm looking at a very interesting question which is also structly isomorphic to my own research question shared in the workshop that is like for the general world model if there are two states which sh are very near in the latent space does it guarantee that their future evolution
[07:19:17] will also be very similar. So if they are neighbors in the latent space where they move in the future will their future be similar. So that's a general question and translating in this specific context the question would turns to if the two intraday market states are close in mariju dynamics also be similar. So the first are the states of the data point and those three measures subsequent returns volatility and liquidity dynamics they are just denotes the future evolution
[07:19:54] trajectory and for how long. So we make it deliberately small because a full experiment will require you to replace the representation geometry for example with PCA with convolutionary uh autoenccoder. So here we only look at like the market JPA encoders itself and to compare whether the p the prediction generated from those neighbors would just be better than the random prediction. So here are some experiment to be set out. So the source database used is the observation before July 20 1926 and the queries used in this method
[07:20:32] is observation from 26 to 13 July 20 uh 19 and the representation we choose is only the frozen market JPass and a source fitted 32dimensional PCA baseline and the primary statistic is the neighbor advantage which is measured like this. So positive values would mean that the representation stables actually have more similar features than the control while zeros means that there is no advantage and negative values would mean that it is just a failure. And here's some data set up over here to loading the data.
[07:21:09] And we do the encoding with a market JPAR in which we use the frozen uh 22.3 million parameter encoder which maps each 20 and 450 state tensor into the 384 dimensional embedding. And for now to save the time we are not using any gradient or model training. So just deterministic computation over here. And then we built a PCA baseline as the reference representation space. So to avoid comparing the JPA only with the random selection, we average the nine normalized market channels into 50 temporal beings which feeds the PCA on
[07:21:45] the source states only and project both the source and the held out states to the 32 dimension. So this is a compact global linear baseline. So but not a claim that PCA is certainly optimal because it requires serious ablation studies. And we also do a neighbor coherence experiment. So for each hel query we retrieve 10 source states by cosign distance allowing most one state from each historical ticket date. And the control consists of the 10 randomly selected source states with the same intraday anchor and the outcome dimensions are standardized using the source data only. Also we use a confidence interval using only the
[07:22:21] trading day block trap book trap so that overlapping intraday observation are not treated as independent and to jump into the most interesting part is the graph. So does the latent space proximity preserve the future outcomes. So here is the n how much the neighbor advantage versus the marked random this is a level like it is out matching the random prediction. So using market jar and using PA 32 they're certainly below uh they're certainly above zero and generating a non-trivial positive results and market jar is
[07:22:59] certainly better than the PCA 32 at least in this context and we also look into a very interesting thing is that using by investigating something called the course representation halfife so with only three horizons this is an only an exploratory interpolation so not a precise physical constant a half-life is reported only when the initial advantage is positive and crosses half of the value inside the measure range. So here is something that I want to share with you guys is that the black line
[07:23:35] here refers to the true market state and is and the blue and red line here is the evolutionary trajectory and those more shallow and and light blue lines are just the neighbors. We choose fine neighbors from any whatever's representation space and the latent space that we choose. So we can see that the trajectory would look very much the same at least for the data that we currently choose. So that's something that we could come up to three simple conclusion is that
[07:24:14] there's a positive and decaying advantage in which there's evidence that market jp geometry has short life dynamic meaning and a candidate representation half-life and we also have a near zero advantage in which augmentation induced similarity did not actually transfer to the future outcome similarity in this sample and we also have a negative advantage in which the learning environments may suppress variable relevant to the future evolution or the source database may not cover the H regime. So this sample is only an exploratory analysis. So the full study should actually increase the database compare multiple seats and
[07:24:50] representation to test explicit regime shift and it's certainly not accessible within the last 45 minutes and I was able to realize this only with the help of codeex to just try everything out and to present it as a coherent notebook but I think whether the latent space would actually guarantee the the quality of evolution if you trait the latent space study as a retrieval method which I have been fully explored in my in my research the representation representation geometry of the 2B turbulent word. So they share
[07:25:26] a very similar structure and I want to explore this direction further by using this as an extension of the topic and thank you everyone. Thank you so much. Thank you.
[07:26:02] Share the screen. Okay. >> Wait one second. >> Okay. So um with the team we wanted to see if um by trying different um distribution law or um in the low world
[07:26:41] um model uh JAR architecture we would get some interesting findings. Instead of using the goian uh we tried um multivariate uh laplas and uh multivariate uh student ty um distribution uh for the results as you can see in the uh table here um for all the different robs that were uh tried the goen distribution bit by far the other um distributions um
[07:27:18] that um that test was run on the uh amnest um data set and with this approach we wanted to check if for the audio part um it would have some impact we have a third of the result. So for the audio we used uh the urban SAS um data set uh which is basically some um random recordings of uh the urban um some urban places uh with some object
[07:27:54] annotation and um yeah here uh okay uh we reach some for the validation and past part um leveraging the mean square error metric for the prediction in the latent uh using the goian distribution. We start with this B baseline and we wanted to compare it with um those two other distribution that we mentioned uh being uh laplas and student t but uh I
[07:28:32] guess that would be to be continued to compare those results. Um yeah the general conclusion is that for those findings um the the goan one um is seems to be more robust and stronger for the amnest data set. Voila. >> Yeah. Yeah,
[07:29:08] thank you. >> Sure. one. Um, just a quick one because I'm here to promote Levie Jeppa. So, I had to do something with this. Um so I basically trained a uh dino world model
[07:29:45] on top of uh levie japa is like a frozen encoder and I trained it on top of the minor navigate data set which is just some small Minecraft data set which is like 64x 64 pixels so very blurry. Uh so I basically have to zoom out a little bit have like a website which clo made for me um where we can run like multiple episodes. So on the left side you can basically see like the imagined um roll out if I press play at least. Uh and on the right side you see reality. Some of those videos are very uninformative because the person doesn't move. I don't know what kind of navigate data set this is if a person doesn't move but uh it is
[07:30:23] in there for some reason. So let me just switch to like a better episode. Also the ocean things are quite boring because you're just running through an ocean. But you can see that we at least learned something in like very small amount of time. um on top of the frozen features. So this is definitely a thing that you can do. Just train a different predictor on top of the VJA uh to basically come up with like actions. We can also switch to um free play and pure imagination. I have to say it doesn't uh it's running live in the background so it's always like a little bit blurry. Uh but at least you can navigate around and you can move your head and uh yeah the
[07:31:00] scene changes. So obviously if you scale this up by a lot and you have like the right data set uh then this makes much more sense and isn't as blurry. Um but yeah you can definitely use it as like a great encoder to to start up your own projects or to basically enhance any world model type of setup you want. That's it.
[07:31:40] Thank God because we only have one. >> No one wants to be then you can I was promised but no one does. Yeah. >> Yeah. Okay.
[07:32:25] Share the screen. Oops. Wrong there. Sorry. Uh, let me try again. Just share the whole screen. Yes.
[07:33:02] >> Um, does that work? >> Yeah. Okay, I think that's fine. >> Speak into the mic. >> Talk. You can get it. >> Oh, there we go. Okay, cool. Uh thank you everyone for uh attending the workshop and staying till the very end. I know it's been a long three days. Uh so I'll try to keep the remarks pretty brief but try to address the most salient points uh of of the workshop. So one thing that I think we all try to understand over the course
[07:33:40] of the workshop but maybe haven't resolved is what is a world model? seems that everybody has a slightly different definition of what a world model is. And so what I thought would be helpful was actually go through the history of world modeling or uh related topics and see if that might help resolve uh this point of contention. So for my research, world model has meant at least three different things over uh the last h 100red years or so. So from the 1940s to 1980s when people talked about a world model they meant a
[07:34:16] symbolic description of the real world which was typically specified by hand. Uh and then from the 80s to the 2010s it often or typically referred to a probabilistic model of how the world would change. Um and since the deep learning revolution really happened, it world model refers to a deep neural network that can be used to predict observations, consequences andor the affinities between states. And certain individuals and researchers uh like I think Yan Lun especially took this took
[07:34:53] a narrower view which is that it would have to be a neural model of the world that was also separate from any actor in that world. And so different individuals have different perspectives on what exactly a neural world model uh should look like. But we can go back even further. In fact, we can go back to 125 CE for I what I think is the first reference to anything even remotely alluding to a world model. So you might have heard of uh stoicism and this the Greeks were the first to be
[07:35:29] stoics and one particular Greek was this guy named Epictitus. So he writes this thing um where he it says, you know, if you're going to take a bath and you know people there are going to be a little rowdy, how do you get over that? Well, you anticipate what's going to happen. You imagine it happening. You imagine yourself experiencing that. And that way you've already gone through the motions and you can allow yourself to enjoy bathing unperturbed. And this broader concept is called the premeditation of evils. Um, and has, you know, stuck with
[07:36:05] stoicism ever since. If we fast forward a couple millennia, we get what I think is the first real relevant result in a from a scientific sense, which is Tolman's experiments with rats. Uh, that I believe were done at at UC Berkeley, but correct me if I'm wrong. So, Tolman did many experiments with rats. Uh, but one of the most famous ones was with rats in a maze. And specifically on the left, you have this kind of predetermined path to a reward where the rat is placed at an entrance and the reward is placed at an end. And over
[07:36:41] time, the rat could, you know, learn to navigate this maze. But then you take that rat and then you put it in a different maze where the original path is sealed off, right? And now that the rat has many more paths to choose from to get to its reward. Now, interestingly, it turns out that 38% of the rats, which is a large plurality of the rats, would choose this path six, which is the most direct route to the reward. So, the rats over the course of their interactions with the prior maze had learned to develop a cognitive map
[07:37:17] of what uh the maze or what the environment looked like. Then in 1970 we had W Terry Winterrad who is a very famous uh researcher and and professor at Stanford um come up with uh what I believe is pronounced sherloo and this was a nearly perfect uh model of a tiny world. So you had this program where you could manipulate blocks uh using natural language um say things like pick up the red block and the and that would cause a program to lift the red block. Um, and you could you could even say that it did not
[07:37:53] understand certain commands. For example, if you said, "Is there a steeple?" The program would say, "I don't know what a steeple is." And then you could say, "A steeple is a pyramid on top of a block." And then it would say, "Okay, I I get what a steeple is." So much much in the way of LLM psychosis nowadays, people were really amazed by this program, right? and they thought we were so close to solving understanding with natural language because if we can do this in this solve space then clearly we just need to like scale this up a little bit and it's totally solved. Um turns out this was kind of a dead end but it was still a very important
[07:38:29] milestone. So, as part of the uh continuing this kind of dead-end track, uh there was this famous program or initiative called Psych spelled CYC. And the idea behind Psych is that we would scale ontologies the hard way, one relation at a time. So, for example, humans would manually encode relations uh for example that doctors are medical professionals and this would all be stuffed into some database. So then you know given some state of the world or given some proposition you could do some you could break that down into relations um and atomic units and you could do
[07:39:07] some reasoning over your knowledge base to come up with uh some kind of inference. Um and you could do this reasonably well but it was impossibly hard to scale because all of this sort of encoding of the knowledge had to be done by hand. uh in the 1980s to 1990s we also shifted to a more probabilistic view of the state of the world. Uh so Judea Pearl um whose name you might recognize did a lot of work on probabilistic reasoning. Ra Sutton who is kind of the father of reinforcement learning had a very famous paper on Dina which in many ways uh
[07:39:45] resembles the kind of world model setups we see today where we would have a model uh take an action and then learn from that action and then uh plan so that you you can learn from simulated experiences as well and then use that to to update the policy on the language side of things. This also meant that you could learn probabilities about the world using largecale corpora. So I'm old enough that when I started doing computational linguistics and LP research, a very big
[07:40:21] thing was something called part of speech tagging. So people really cared about, you know, what kind of word a word was. For example, the is a determiner, market is a noun, priced is a verb. And this was a really hard task for a very long time and people would frame this as uh you know using a hidden marov model and you would want to learn these transition probabilities from really large corpora. Um and so this actually was a very important paradigm shift in in NLP and and related areas as well. Starting from 2012, uh, deep learning stole the show. And part of the reason
[07:40:59] deep learning really took off was because you could scale things. And the title of this slide, make the whole world in distribution, is a reference to something uh Ilia Sutsker, who is one of the co-founders of OpenAI and and a big deep learning pioneer, um said was, you know, kind of the premise behind OpenAI and and related companies, which is yes, you know, maybe neural nets don't work that well when they're small, but if you just make everything bigger and put more data into the model, then eventually the whole world would kind of become in
[07:41:35] distribution and your whole concerns about lack of generalization would go away. And there were really two kind of columns here of efforts. One was scaling language. Uh and the premise behind this was that humans have some kind of model of the world and this is crystallized in language. So you could just learn by predicting the next token and and doing similar things and this would work pretty well. So this kind of led to uh initially embedding models like wordtovec if you've heard of that and eventually led to LLMs uh as well. On
[07:42:11] the other side of things you had the people who were bigger proponents of scaling experience. So this idea that you can't just learn from you know language you actually have to go out into the world or some simulation of the world and learn from that instead. So uh m0ero which uh describes Google deep mind's efforts to learn Atari games not given the rules but just sort of given the environment and allowing the model to learn from itself was very successful in 20 especially in 2015 2016 there was a huge uh you know renaissance and deep uh reinforcement learning because these
[07:42:49] things work so well um autonomous vehicles right part of the premise of Tesla's autopilot was that if we get the cars out there, then we could collect data from the real world and use that to improve our policy. Exand is actually not that well known, but it was an effort by Google DeepMind um to kind of create uh AGI and it did not work as well as as uh DeepMind leadership had hoped and was actually part of the reason why Google was behind on language models um compared to their their peers in the form of OpenAI because they were
[07:43:25] more bullish on this approach of scaling appearance sorry scaling experience as opposed to scaling language. um at least for a very long time. So nowadays we have kind of embraced all aspects of this spectrum right so we can learn from real language so text on the internet Wikipedia and so on we can learn from synthetic language uh there's for example a very famous data set called tiny stories um which is emblematic of how good synthetic language data can be and a lot of post- training is done by you know sampling rollouts from the policy that you're
[07:44:02] trying to postrain we can learn from real experience. For example, putting our driverless cars out in the wild. Um, and increasingly with humanoid robots, a lot of these companies want to put those robots in your home so that they can collect real data. As slightly terrifying as that might be. And we also can learn from synthetic experience. Uh, Dan Jar Hafner who gave a talk here um, uh, yes the day before yesterday um, has a lot of great work um, in this space. Ultimately, what Daario Amade calls the big blob of compute idea, the premise
[07:44:38] that what matters is growing the amount of compute and allowing it to subsume basically all the re resources thrown at it seems to be the prevailing narrative. And so whether that data is real or synthetic or comes from language or experience is secondary to ultimately growing this blob and making it bigger and bigger. In with respect to world models, there are many questions uh to answer. It's it's a growing field, a very promising field. I think we've seen a lot of great work over the last three days. Um and I
[07:45:14] highly encourage you to both read all of those papers, but also, you know, think about writing your own in this space. But there are three open questions in particular that I'll uh bring up because this is what interests me. one is can we make any theoretical claims or about the necessity or lack thereof of explicit world models. So one big divergence uh between uh the folks that spoke here was whether it's gone. Okay, I guess I'll just try to recount it from uh memory. I think I was kicked out of the Okay. Anyway, we'll just add a little bit. So one big
[07:45:51] divergence between the folks at Spokia was whether it would be enough to have an implicit model of the world um for example that could be learned through language or whether you would need an explicit world model um and that debate hasn't been resolved and you know could we resolve this using theory that's a question for the theoreticians in the cloud in the in the room. A second question was whether it's enough to operate on latent states or whether we need to uh work in the space of observations. So Jan in particular was a big fan and proponent of operating um
[07:46:27] using the latent space with embeddings um for and there are many good reasons to do so. Uh but again this is an unresolved debate and I think there's much work to be done in resolving it. The third big question to me is if you have a world model, can you adapt it? Right? So the world is constantly changing and moreover as we release more and more AI into the wild, the world is going to adapt in response to the rise of AI, right? Especially as they drive more and more activity um on the internet, especially commercial activity, which is relevant given where
[07:47:03] we are. So given the rapidly changing environment, can we rapidly adapt our world models as well? And what techniques um are are best suited to doing so? So adaptation, latent space versus observation space, and the theoretical claims underlying the necessity of explicit versus implicit world models are three really promising areas that I think you should think about. Well, that's all for today and thank you again for coming. Uh thank you to the organizers uh especially XY Randall and and Bradford and also the
[07:47:39] many wonderful folks at Kai uh Lauren and and Kathy and uh Florence and Arley and all of the interns as well for helping they we couldn't have done it without them. Thank you so much. We see many of you the false in February and it's not defined the world of