[00:00] It's great to have you here, Jan, just in time. Or, well, a few minutes late, but anyways. So, today we'll talk about embodied AI. I know that's a topic that's, you know, you're passionate about. Also a topic topic that I'm I'm also quite excited about. Actually, both of us, I think, for many years. But I think now a lot more people, you know, this is really kind of coming a lot of There's a lot of excitement, a lot of investments, a lot of things going on. And so I think we'll dig a little bit deeper in what's already possible, what we see on the horizon, the gaps that we see, the kind of things that are needed, etc., etc. So, um So maybe first embodied AI, what are we talking about? So it's really um you know, AI that can actually perceive in the world, understand the situation, be able to reason about that, plan based on that, and then act in the

[00:01] world. So that's really what we're talking about. This can go from self-driving vehicles to then also, you know, humanoid robots and and things like that, and anything in between, I would say. um So, Jan, you know, like maybe we can start where are we today? Like what can we do? What can't we do? Can So we're not very far. uh You know, we have So first of all, it's not just embodied AI in the in the sense of you know, robots and things like that. It's also disembodied physical AI. AI for the real world, right? So there's a lot of systems in the world that need to be understood, predicted, controlled, which are not necessarily bodies, right? It could be it could be a manufacturing process, could be a turbojet engine, it could be you know, any kind of um industrial process. um Anything that's physical, anything for which the data comes to you in a form of

[00:02] a sequence of high-dimensional, continuous, noisy um signals. Video is the best example. Proprioceptive sensors on a robot is another good example. But there is a lot of applications of this that have nothing to do with with robotics, right? So, um So it's anything that is not language-related. That's that's really the the better definition, right? So, the real world is fundamentally different from language. And the reason language has been like LLMs have been so successful is because language is easy. um You know, we have systems that can pass the bar exam. I'm not going to say they're as smart as a lawyer. I don't know if there's any lawyer in the room here. No, we're all scientists and engineers here, so I can say that. um And so we have systems that can pass the bar exam. They can also, you know, do math, right? Solve equations, they can write code. Many of us here write code, too. uh

[00:03] But they don't really deal with the real world, right? Which is the reason why we don't have domestic robots, we don't have level five self-driving cars still. um At least not at the consumer level. And so we and, you know, human humanoid robots &gt;&gt; but not level five. No level five. And uh And even at level four, you know, we cheat a lot. I think level four less than way more. I think you can claim that they achieve level four. They do. &gt;&gt; But not level five. They need full maps, they need control of where they are and when they operate. &gt;&gt; And they need, you know, exotic sensors, lidars, and complete &gt;&gt; okay. That's okay. That's fine. &gt;&gt; can cheat. It's It's perfectly I don't think that's cheating, by the way. No, no. I mean, it's okay. But it's expensive in the sense that how is it that a 17-year-old can learn to drive in, you know, 10 to 20 hours of practice? uh And we have millions of hours of training data that we could, in principle, train a machine learning system by imitation to imitate human drivers. But that doesn't work. You

[00:04] don't get reliable driving systems this way. And so, um that sort of leads me to another statement about robotics. There's a lot of companies building humanoid robots, and they do those kinds of, you know, they play kung fu and, you know, impressive thing. This is all precomputed. Okay? uh None of those company, absolutely none of them, has any idea how to make those robots smart enough to be useful. Right? It's a big secret of robotics industry. um You can train them on very narrow tasks. And you have to to collect lots and lots of data the same way, you know, people thought they would build self-driving cars. um And it's expensive, and it's only practical for a small number of narrow tasks, and you you don't have robots that, you know, have nearly as good as a common sense as your house cat, let alone human intelligence, right? So, um that's the you know, that's the challenge for the next few years, right? Getting a system

[00:05] to really understand the real world. And the problem is that the approaches that have been successful for language do not work for high-dimensional, continuous, noisy data. You have to use something else. So, um you know, so let's let's actually start with you know, with what people are trying now in in robotics and in in in embodied AI. So, you know, and and I know your positions on on LLMs and what what you can do with them. uh I agree with you, language is is easy because in a sense we immediately start at a semantic level. We have, you know, tokens are essentially very close to like a semantic concept. um And so directly by working at that level, we can ignore a lot of the noisy, complicated, real-world kind of things. You know, we say car, and we can imagine many many different things, and so on. uh But, you know, for an LLM, it's just kind of a car with, you know, some dimensions with it, but kind of some concepts associated with it, but but but like no understanding what it actually is, right? um just having correlations to other stuff.

[00:06] Anyway, so there's LLMs, there's then there's then VLMs, and there's VLAs now that there's a lot of excitement around, right? uh I Well, you know, not by you, but but by others. So, but but I'd like you to a little bit kind of explain like the relationship between all of those those three, and and you know, also where you see the shortcomings there. Right. So VLM is, you know, basically the idea of mixing in visual representations together with language, with tokens that come from language. um And then use the machinery of LLMs basically to do to do that. uh VLAs are kind of a version of this where the output of the system is a sequence of actions. There's a major flaw with those approaches, and they're extremely difficult extremely difficult to make them work. The VLAs or or so-called agentic systems only work in situations where the actions obey a a script that you have to basically

[00:07] repeat all the time. um You know, repetitive task of some kind. So it's a new way of just designing automating a task, which is data-driven instead of being, you know, programmatic. uh But it's very brittle, it's very restricted to very narrow applications for which there is a you know, a script that you can follow. That's not what you want. You want a system that can accomplish a new task it's never been trained to accomplish, which every human is capable of doing, every animal even, uh facing a new situation using their mental model of the world. Okay, so here we're going to talk about world models. A world model is a big buzzword now, but mostly but people mean different things for this. And And it's mostly a buzzword in research, not so much in industry. The AI industry is completely LLM-pilled, as they say. uh And and in Silicon Valley, everybody is working on the same thing. They're all digging the same trench. They're stealing each other's engineers so that they they can't afford to do something

[00:08] different because if they start going on a tangent, they're going to, you know, fall behind the other guys. And so they're all doing the same thing, and that's one big reason I left Meta, right? Because Meta also became LLM-pilled. um You know, with sort of recent research thing. And it's fine, you know, it's a strategic decision that maybe makes sense for for them. Just not what I'm interested in. uh And so, um I cannot imagine that we can build agentic systems without those systems having an ability to predict in advance what the consequences of their actions are going to be. The way we act in the world is that we know what the we can predict the consequence consequences of our actions. And that's what allows us to plan. um So what is a world model? Given the state of a environment, a system you want to control at time T, and given an action or intervention you imagine taking, can you predict the state of the world or the of the or the system at time T

[00:09] plus one? If you have, that's a world model. You don't do this at the pixel level if it's video. uh You do this in an abstract representation space. And that's a crucial key insight that you you you know, you need to really understand. You cannot predict every detail, for example, what is going to happen in the video. I can take a video of this room, rotate the camera, and stop here, and then ask the system continue the video. System will predict, you know, where the room is, probably, you know, a door at some point. There's no way it can predict what all of you looks like. There's absolutely no way in hell I can predict the texture of your beautiful uh dress here, which is, you know, very shiny, and uh which has, you know, a huge amount of information. It's just impossible, right? So if you train a generative architecture, which is supposed to predict at the pixel level, it fails. It doesn't do anything useful for you. I mean, it might produce cute videos or cute pictures with diffusion models, but

[00:10] that's it. And it it will not understand the underlying structure of of the world. For that, you need to find an abstract representation of of uh of reality that allows you to make predictions and eliminate all the details you cannot predict. And we'll come we'll come back to that. I first want to take a step back to um you know, to the the VLM and and VLA world uh and and LM world. I think you said like you can only do things that are essentially scripted and this and that. But I would say in industry, there are many many things that are useful and that are scripted and you know, you have to carry out a certain task and most of the time you have to do it. So So, I would say there is probably a lot of potential for the current this current technology to actually deliver value uh with today's state. Like if you look at you know, VLMs essentially, you know, we it's it's it's text and I agree it's actually really text first and then you know, an image is worth a thousand uh tokens literally pretty much. Um and so uh and then you know, with with action it's you still essentially take a picture. This is the situation.

[00:11] This is what I want to do and then you know, like from that you kind of if it's all scripted kind of in a sense, you can kind of carry it out, right? And you can build you can program it. It's probably a simpler way to program than maybe what we used to do before. So So So, let's say you know, like if if if you would be an advocate of VLAs or so, like what do you think we can all achieve already with what we have today? Well, I mean, it's like LLMs. Those things are useful. And there is probably a number of uh applications probably relatively narrow narrower than what people are thinking for which those things would be useful and practical and deployable. But you know, I old enough to remember what happened in the 1980s with the expert systems. Okay, expert systems, you know, you were going to the coolest job at the time was going to be uh knowledge engineer. You were you were going to sit down next to a human expert and then trans translate the knowledge of the human expert in rules and facts. Okay, in a and then use a inference engine to basically replace

[00:12] the expert or you know, kind of clone the expert if you want. No machine learning whatsoever. It was entirely human. That approach to AI essentially failed because the the brittleness of the resulting system and the cost of of this, you know, knowledge transfer into a machine was just too high. So, there was a very narrow number of applications for which it it was practical. It's going to be the same thing for VLA. It's going to be a relatively small number of applications where you have scripted, you know, scenarios where those things are going to be useful. Um but in the end, if you are interested like I am in, you know, building systems that have the intelligence of let's say a cat, you know, let alone humans. Um you need common sense. You need the ability to predict uh the consequences of your actions. You need the ability to plan. You need the ability to reason. And you're not going to get this with a with VLA or VLM or LLMs or any generative architectures. &gt;&gt; I agree, but I would say, you know, I see a lot of potential industry of just you know, doing what you're supposed to do. &gt;&gt; I mean, LLMs are super useful for

[00:13] coding, you know, no question. Well, okay. So So, back to um you know, to world models. Um so you said like you need to you know, maybe not predict at a pixel level. Now, sometimes you can I mean like video models actually do very nice work in particular when you know, say like like with a VLA when you're given a starting position. You know, this is the situation and I have to predict now I'm I just need to do a relatively simple task. I need to move a few things around, kind of assemble something or so. There I can probably predict at a pixel level exactly how it should look like, right? Um so So, I think sometimes, you know, there are situations where you can actually go to the pixel level. Um I know of course, you know, like you're a strong proponent of of all the of the Jepa framework of of going to um you know, I agree with you. You don't have to predict every pixel for most situations. I think sometimes you do like when you really want a fine scale thing in the end, you might need detail. My question is actually where you know, how do we find What is the right level at which we and I think it's

[00:14] not always the same necessarily for for every task. So, what is the right level of abstraction at which we need to predict? I mean, we as humans we do indeed always or you know, our whole brain seems to be dedicated to predicting the future. And then we look at the differences, right? And and and we might care about them or not. Uh and indeed we we I think we actually don't predict I mean, even most of the Jepa maybe I'm wrong, but it's predicting at a certain level of abstraction. Uh mostly at a fixed level that's learned of abstraction. Um intuitively, I would actually like to be able to predict throughout the levels and go to the level I want. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah, totally. No, I mean, you you know, picking the right level of abstraction is absolutely essential to understanding the world around us. Um in fact, we don't know any other way of doing it. It's it's something that, you know, not many people realize, but um let's say I want to plan a trip from New York to Paris. Let's say I'm sitting in my office in New York. It's midday and I want to be in Paris tomorrow. Uh I cannot possibly plan my entire trip

[00:15] to Paris in terms of elementary actions for humans, which are millisecond by millisecond muscle control. Right? Cuz it's too complicated. I have a planning issue and I just don't have the information. You know, I don't know if someone is going to run into me when I walk to the elevator. I don't know if how long I'm going to have to wait for a taxi. Right? So, I cannot plan, but I can plan at a very abstract level. At the abstract level, I can say, well, I need to go to the airport and catch a plane. Okay, now I have a sub goal, being at the airport. My new objective is being close to the airport, right? Um I'm in New York, so I go down on the street and hail a taxi. Okay, that's a two-action plan, but it's very high level. Very little information I need to know uh other than maybe the condition of traffic. It would determine whether I take a taxi or subway or helicopter. Um then you know, then how do I go to on the street? I go to the elevator, push the button, walk out walk out of the building. How do I go to the elevator? You know, so at some point in the hierarchy you get down to a point where

[00:16] you can just take the action because you know how to stand up from your chair and walk to the door and open the door and things like that, right? So, this this is called hierarchical planning. It's completely unsolved problem in AI. People have you know, mostly given up. But that's basically what really is uh a big challenge that we we should crack uh for for kind of future AI systems that can behave properly. Animals do this all the time. Humans are much better at abstractions than humans, but but animals do this. Um so, that requires a multi-level world model. Right? A low-level world model that predicts short-term with a lot of details, with low-level actions. Okay, if I send a particular command to my muscle, it's going to move my arm in a particular way, right? Or high-level actions, you know, uh um hailing a taxi to go to the airport. That's more of a high-level action. Um the low level is not describable in language. Uh some part of the high level is and if it's a normal script, maybe VLA will,

[00:17] you know, do something like that. But um but really what you need for all of this is a mental model that allows you to predict what the consequence of your actions, regardless of the levels, are going to be. So, how do you train a hierarchical model of this type? So, first of all, you have to realize that you cannot make prediction in pixel space, in input space. You have to make prediction in that abstract representation space. And when you train that, so this is called this is the Jepa architecture that uh Mark was just mentioning, right? So, Jepa means joint embedding predictive architecture and it means learning an abstract representation of the input signal and making prediction in that abstract representation space and training this whole thing at once. Uh and the prediction might be conditioned by an action that you imagine taking, which gives you a world model. Um so the abstraction level that this system is going to learn depends on the horizon that you train it to make predictions at, right? If you train the system to make prediction you know, 10 milliseconds in the future, it's going to make very accurate

[00:18] predictions in the short term. Those predictions are going to diverge from reality really quickly. So, there you have to go one level up. Maybe predict 1/10 of a second or a second in the future. And then the higher you go in the hierarchy, the longer term uh the predictions are. I could in principle describe everything that is taking place in this room here between us in terms of uh quantum field theory. All right, that'd be crazy. But it would be a you know, a very accurate description of everything that takes place here, including the neurochemistry of our brain processes and what we think and everything, right? But it's completely impractical. I would need to measure the wave function you know, of of this room and probably like a cubic kilometer around us. Um and then you're using use some ridiculously powerful quantum computer to actually do the simulation. Like we don't do this, right? Uh so, we invent abstractions in science, but also that's what we do when we perceive and understand the world. We invent abstractions like particles, atoms, molecules. In the living world,

[00:19] it's proteins, organelles, cells, organisms, societies, ecosystems. And the the right level at which to describe what's going on in this room now is, you know, psychology, economics and science, right? It's pretty high in the hierarchy. We're not going to predict like, you know, the reaction of all of us in terms of particle physics. Uh that's impossible. So, being able to ignore details that are irrelevant that you cannot predict so that you can make long-term prediction is absolutely crucial to intelligence and generative models do not allow you to do this. This is what Jepa enables. But Jepa at this point still is typically at a particular for particular task, it learns a particular level of abstraction that's Well, that's what you see in publications, but Okay. We're working on multi-level Okay. Okay. &gt;&gt; hierarchies. Okay. So, in terms of you know, to to act in the uh you know, in in in the physical world,

[00:20] um what are the sensing modalities that, you know, that you think uh we need? So, like now we narrow it down a little bit to like, you know, maybe more like really robot like robotics applications, right? Um What do you see as as kind of um useful um kind of you know, where where both have a background in vision or so so we of course will use cameras or or you know, vision sensors, but but what else is needed uh to to make things work? So, what what is a you know, what would be the appropriate world model for for robot? Um there's several component. There's first a a model a mechanical sort of mechanical dynamical model of the robot, which, you know, you apply a torque to a a motor in one of the joints, right? And the arm or the legs moving a particular way. You can actually write down such dynamical models with a bunch of equations. This is what classical robotics uh is about, and you can use this model to do motion planning to some extent. It doesn't work that well actually for complex actions. But all

[00:21] those those videos of, you know, kung fu playing robots, that's that's what they do. It's all planned in advance using handwritten models. They're fine-tuned a little bit using reinforcement learning and stuff, but it's kind of a minor minor step. Um But then there is the model of the world around the robot. Can you predict what, you know, other people are going to do, you know, whether this object is about to fall, you know, going to catch it, you know, things like that. So, it's a model of intuitive physics. How do you learn that? You learn that We learn that as babies by watching the world go by. And it takes 9 months for a human baby to learn gravity, to learn that objects that are not supported fall. Um 6-month-old babies haven't yet integrated the idea that objects, you know, don't float in the air. Uh but 10-month-olds do. You know, the but by the by the time they have. Uh and so we we acquire in the first few months of life all of those basic concepts about the world. The world is three-dimensional. There are objects that can move independently. There are you know, objects that, you know, move

[00:22] that are not animated, so they follow certain rules. There is, you know, categories of objects. You don't need to give names to them. We know the difference between a table and a chair. Um you know, and and then there you know, objects have inertia, conservation of momentum, things like that, right? So, we learn this intuitively. Can we train a system from video that will acquire this type of common sense that, you know, animals learn in days and and humans months? And the answer is yes. So, we have those video systems, those Jepa architectures, right? And, you know, and we determine the level of abstraction at which we train them. Um so, they learn a representation of the video from a window of 64 frames or something like this, and and they're trained you you take a piece of video, you corrupt it uh by masking a piece of it, and then you run the full video to an encoder, run the corrupted video to another encoder, uh and train a predictor to predict the representation of the full video from the partially corrupted one. Uh and you train the whole thing end to

[00:23] end simultaneously, and the system comes up with a good abstract representation of the world that only contains information that is predictable. Okay, and it only predicts the information the part of the of the world that is predictable. It's going to ignore all the noise and details of, you know, texture of your dress. Uh although you should not ignore that actually. And and you know, and this kind of this kind of detail. And so, um So, that that's really the the way the way to proceed. We've trained these models. It's called V-Jepa 2, V for video. And it was trained on the equivalent of 100 years of video. That seems like a lot, okay? Cuz it doesn't learn as much as a almost a human as a 2-year-old. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; No. Uh so, it doesn't learn for that long. And um and it's not it's not a lot of video. It's about It's about a day of YouTube uploads. I mean, we we have like

[00:24] enormous amounts of video. If you put a number on it, it's about um 10 to the 15 to 10 to the 16 bytes at 2 megabytes per second. This is 100 times more than the biggest LLMs, okay? Cuz there's not that much text on the internet. It's only about 10 to the 14 bytes. Um and so, using video, you can train with way more data than any LLMs, which is why we're never going to get to human level intelligence by training LLMs or by training on text only, right? We need the real world. Okay, so you train this system on 100 years of video, and then we can test whether the systems have acquired some common sense. So, you show them a video where something impossible happens. This is, by the way, how we test babies to figure out if they've learned a particular concept like like like gravity. You show babies scenario where like a little car is on a on a platform, and you push the car off the platform, and the car appears to float in the air. 6-month-old babies don't pay attention. 10-month-olds go like this.

[00:25] And I pay attention to it because, you know, we're programmed to pay attention to the violations of our prediction of our internal world model. That's how That's how we know we have a world model. Um and that's how you know, psychologists test that. And so, we can show a video where something impossible occurs, like someone threw a ball in the air a ball in the air, and the ball stops, or it changes its shape to a cube, or it disappears. And the prediction error goes to the roof when you run the model on it because it thinks it's like, I didn't predict anything like this. That's impossible. And so, that's the first time I've I've seen any kind of model that has some level of common sense, and I think it's, you know, But before we I think if you run it for a a video prediction model, it those scenarios, as as you say, if you have the starting position and you see it happen, you could also run it at a full pixel level, and you would you would probably very nicely also there be able to measure that suddenly there's a discrepancy with what your video model predicts and what um you know, like what you see in the

[00:26] video. I hope you'll pardon my French, but absolutely no way in hell. No, I I I don't agree. Like I think so I think so if you if you have the starting the starting, you know, point of the video, and you run from that frame, you run it forward, so you have a few frames, and you run it forward the video model, you will suddenly see that there's a big deviation between what you predict at the pixel. No, it's only because you have the starting frame and and this and that, but you could also predict. Now, I agree with you that this is like complete overkill for the task, but I think you can also do it. You can essentially do it up to the level that you are you don't have enough abstraction anymore. &gt;&gt; It simply does not work. We've tried to do this. I've tried to do self-supervised learning from video for 15 years. The first 10 years I tried to use generative models with latent variables, okay? And the best method that we have to do this today is diffusion models. And with this, you know, you can produce good videos. There's no question. Uh it never worked for natural videos. It worked for stylized videos like video games, um you know, basically already abstract representations of video or like segmentation maps, you know, to some

[00:27] extent. But it never really worked, and the reason it doesn't work is because there is an infinite number of plausible things that can happen in a video. And when you train the system to make predictions at the pixel level, the best thing it can do, it can't represent a distribution over all possible frames. And so, the best thing it can do is, uh you know, produce an average of all the possible futures. So, if you use diffusion models, you get around that problem, but not entirely because the your predictor can be completely wood collapsed. So, it will produce a nice video, but it's not going to understand the underlying dynamics. So, um why do we know this? We know this because we have lots and lots of empirical evidence of training generative models for image representation. Okay, so there is a very good example, which works great for text, doesn't work for images. I mean, it works, but not well. You take a you take a piece of data, you corrupt it by masking a piece of it, similar to what I was describing earlier, and then you train some big model, basically an autoencoder, to reconstruct the the full input, whether it's text or images. In

[00:28] the context of NLP, that's called BERT. In the context of images, that's called MAE, masked autoencoder. Um and you do get some representation of the text or the image. For images, though, it's very expensive to train, and the representation you get out of it sucks. It really doesn't work very well. The stuff that the method that produced the best image representations are all joint embedding architectures, which means architectures that are trained without a a criterion that attempts to reconstruct pixels. You have to allow the system to ignore information that cannot be predicted. And if you put a reconstruction criterion, it will have to reconstruct everything, and you kill it by doing it. And we know this. We have lots of comparisons of MAE with DINO, so you know about DINO. Uh probably the best method for self-supervised learning of image representation. Probably the best method for feature extraction, you know, Mhm. Whatever, right? Whatever method you

[00:29] use, uh it this beats supervised learning now, right? Self-supervised learning for images with joint embedding architecture beat all approaches to supervised learning, even those for which we have tons of data. Uh this is new. Only happened in the last year. Um so, DINO is one of them. I-Jepa is another one. Uh I mean, there's a bunch of you know, a small number of methods like this that, you know, beat generative approaches for image representation, and there's tons of benchmarks for which we have images. So, we I started realizing this about 5 years ago, and basically started, you know, kind of bashing generative models and completely kind of try to brainwash everyone into abandoning generative AI, which is difficult because, you know, everyone talks about generative AI as the thing. Uh it didn't make me very popular among some of my colleagues who work on LLMs. So, um you know, so so coming back to um to to trying to solve robotics,

[00:30] uh you mentioned a little bit uh reinforcement learning. Um you know, there are there's uh you know, big fan of unsupervised learning. There's also supervised learning. Let's say in the mix of those different things like um you know, they probably have to work together in some way, right? Like you you want to figure out how the world work, probably unsupervised. Uh you want to learn how to kind of do some tasks. That's probably has some supervisory signal for sure. Um and then, you know, reinforcement learning is probably the thing that actually gets it all to kind of you know, fine-tune and the kind of all the the actual moving parts of the robot and and so on. So, how how would you kind of see those things coming together? So, about 10 years ago, uh whenever I give a uh talk, I would show a slide with a cake. All right? I'm sure some of you have seen it. Who has seen the cake? Okay, great. Uh that was about 10 years ago, and the cake is an analogy. I was trying to make the point.

[00:31] Everybody at the time was like completely into reinforcement learning. I was telling people like reinforcement learning is so inefficient in terms of samples. It's never going to amount to much. Um except for games. Cuz for games, you can generate so much data that it's fine. Uh and that turned out to be true. Okay, so the bulk of the cake, the genoise of the cake, if you want, is self-supervised learning. You learn about the world, you learn to represent it, you learn world models, you learn prediction. Um that's self-supervised. You don't need to observe an expert, you don't need to learn from anyone else. You just observe the world go by. Okay? Um that's the bulk of it. Most of your parameters or whatever, your intelligence, most of what you learn, you learn this way. Then there is a thin &gt;&gt; And by the way, that would also be embodiment agnostic. It would be yeah. Yeah. Um then there is a thin layer of either supervised learning or imitation learning or behavior cloning or inverse reinforcement learning. There's several names for it, but it's basically trying to imitate or reproduce

[00:32] uh behavior of an expert, right? Or human. Um that's a thin layer. Um Most animals never go to that phase because they never meet their parents. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; So, um [snorts] like octopus never meet their parents. They get really smart in just a few months. They live only 2 years. Um and then there is the cherry on the cake, and that's reinforcement learning. It's just like minor fine-tuning because it's so inefficient. Like if you if you were to train a self-driving car from scratch to learn to drive, it's completely impractical. People thought this was a possibility, you know, back then 12 years ago. Um and realized quickly that that was completely impractical. Um it would require too many trials. A car, you know, driving next to a cliff would have to run off the cliff a few dozen times before realizing it's a bad idea. And then a few other dozen times very dangerous in Switzerland. Um you know, and then a few more dozen times to realize how to not run off that cliff. And then you're next to another cliff, and you have to do it again, right? Because it doesn't necessarily transfer

[00:33] to the new situation. So, you know, reinforcement learning would work if I learned at the right abstraction level, you might have been able to generalize. Yeah, but then this abstraction level is given to you by self-supervised learning, right? So, Yeah, but you can build on top of it, let's say, like Sure. Yeah. No, I mean, it's it's necessary, right? I mean, clearly we adjust our behavior uh you know, from you know, action that we do in the world and we realize we're not doing it right. So, yeah, that that's a required cherry, but it's only a minor But then, you know, I have some colleagues that are kind of big in reinforcement learning and and um and the way they do it is they use simulation to do it. And of course, you know, there's still a little bit of a gap, but you know, they get kind of robots with all kinds of things kind of they figure out their their gait and this and that and they you know, and then of course, there's the gait of just walking on a flat surface, that's pretty you could design that. But then, they also figure out how to kind of crawl in very interesting ways, you know, from over things and so on. So, simulation is a thing that a little bit decouples that cost. There's still a cost to simulation, but it's not the same cost as actually throwing the robot off the you know, off the you know, the [snorts] bricks or you know, down the cliff or whatever, right?

[00:34] I mean, for any particular set of task or domain or engineering problem, you're going to have a very specific solution to it that's going to you know, solve the problem. Uh which is why, you know, we have you know, 30 30 year old gadgets that can beat us at chess, uh but they're not necessarily intelligent, right? Um so, same thing same thing here, right? We can we can cheat our way out or we can engineer the hell out of it. Uh and you know, solve problems of this type. So, I mean, to train a set of reinforcement learning to control a humanoid robot, you basically have to simulate thousands of copies of that humanoid robot in in parallel on supercomputers and have them do all kinds of stuff. And still in the end, &gt;&gt; Thousands you might do on one GPU, but That's right. Possibly. Maybe well well, not if you have perception. That would be more expensive, but uh but you know, in the end, it will only be trained for this particular task, this particular environment, and you know, it'll be be brittle. A much more efficient way to approach this is is this idea of training world models. So,

[00:35] you know, ask a 10 year old who's never done it before to accomplish a new task. And you know, 10 year old tend to accomplish new tasks pretty often. But like, you know, ask a 10 year old to clear the dinner table and fill up the dishwasher. 10 year old can do it the first time. Doesn't need to be trained for it. Um you know, it might become more efficient at doing it if you if it you know, does it multiple times, but can do it the first time. Why? Because of a world model. Um same thing for the you know, 17 year old learning to drive. The world model allows the 17 year old to predict that you know, if you're driving next to a cliff and turn the turn the wheel to the right, the car will run off the cliff and nothing good will come out of this. That's the that's a world model. That's what allows us to solve a new task zero shot without being trained or to learn new tasks like driving extremely quickly or skiing, right? Same thing. Uh first time you ski, you're kind of hesitant and you kind of think about

[00:36] everything you're supposed to do, and then you become familiar and it becomes kind of second nature, but that's the second phase, right? That's the difference that uh psychologists call this system one and system two. System one is tasks that you can accomplish automatically without thinking. System two is you use your mental world model, that's all your prefrontal cortex essentially. Um and then you accomplish uh you can plan what actions and you accomplish that task. So, for you know, unsupervised learning, I think you can you know, you can learn from corpus of data, kind of understand how the world works and so. But still translating that to a particular embodiment, um there are challenges there, right? Like because there you don't have an unlimited amount of data anymore to kind of just learn basic principles of how the world functions and so on. So, so how do you see that kind of connection to the specific embodiment uh to the you know, like people train something on one embodiment and then they have to transfer to another embodiment, and you know, you have to start all over. So, like not for

[00:37] understanding the world, but for understanding how you kind of do something in the world. Okay, so here's the experiment we did with V-JEPA 2. And we have a new version coming out, V-JEPA 2.1, soon. So, V-JEPA 2, you you pretrain on these 100 years of natural videos, right? And the system learns to represent video, it learns to fill in the blanks in the video. That's the first phase. Now you have a really good representation of uh of of you know, physical reality and a good abstract representation and an ability to predict, but not action conditioned. So, it's not related to any particular embodiment or you know, there's no robot arm the system is controlling. So, there's a second phase where you fix the encoder and you fine-tune the predictor and you add an input, which is an action, right? So, you have position of the robot and state of the world and action that you observe um or that you send to the robot, and then you observe the state of the world and the robot uh right after. That requires

[00:38] two sub models, a model of the robot itself and a robot of the environment and then maybe a model of the robot itself, a model of the environment cuz the environment might evolve by itself, and maybe a model of the interaction between the two, right? So, if I if I move my hand here and I close my hand, nothing happens. Okay? That's completely under my control. But if I move it next, you know, around the the glass and I close my hand, now I pick up the glass. So, that's an interaction between the environment and the the thing you the system has to model all that. Now, it turns out that fine-tuning phase where you have state, action, next state, does not require that much data. And the data you can obtain through simulation. But it's not a simulation of a task, a simulation of just the dynamics of a system. So, you don't need a huge amount of data. And the model that you get at the end is generic, you can use it for any task. So, now you can use that for planning motion of a robot to actually pick up a glass or or pour water into a glass, and then actually works.

[00:39] So, I switch to something something else, like I want to first go back in time to you know, when computer vision started working, at least you know, the geometric parts are working long before that, but let's say the semantic understanding of the world. Uh I would say that's essentially you know, CNNs started making that work about 15 years ago. Um the um you know, so there we had a very useful clear inductive bias of hey, you know, like if I see something here or there, it doesn't matter. I want the same filters, the same thing, the same understanding. So, are there things like this? Um you You then then there's also of course, uh what is it? The the the the bitter lesson that's saying like forget all of that, you know, like if I see a cat up there, it's probably like a floating cat. So, it's something very different than when I see it. I should not see a cat up there. So, I suppress that and so I don't want the same filters up there than I want them down there and and stuff like that. And so, eventually if you have enough data, you know, like forget about all these

[00:40] inductive biases and so on. On the other hand, I'm very frustrated in robotics, you know, like this is now with relay and stuff like that also, but you know, indeed a big part of the field is like, "Okay, I've trained this relay with like a camera up here and like my arm is exactly up there and this exact configuration. And actually, by the way, I have a fixed background. Nobody can, you know, this wouldn't work here. I need the exact background, the exact pixel, by the way, indeed in their cases often, which is completely, but um but essentially, um you know, a lot of that is essentially perfectly predictable with, you know, we have methods to kind of, you know, [snorts] transfer that to predict it and so on. Um Where do you see the, you know, like the you know, are there inductive biases similar to what we had with, um you know, with with the convolutional kind of um shift invariance essentially that we're bringing in? Like are there similar things that you see on the horizon or like things that could be applicable for the things we're trying out now in embodied AI? So, you you can always, as you say, you can always uh replace

[00:41] inductive biases in your architecture or prior knowledge in your architecture like, you know, convolutional nature &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; um by more data. And if your training is mostly self-supervised, perhaps you know, you have essentially from video, you have an infinite supply of data. You have more data than you can you can you can you can manage. Uh so, maybe there are the the type of uh prior knowledge that we, you know, put into encoders like like the convolutional nature are no longer necessary. And we see this, you know, in the Okay, here's an interesting uh uh piece of data. The in the academic world, in the publications, uh the the best computer vision systems, most of the papers use transformers, vision transformer VITs, or some variation variation of it. Uh video not quite the case because transformers on video start to become really expensive if you want to do high resolution.

[00:42] Um but you can get the same performance with convolutional nets. And you will get it with less data. But if you have data, why would you kind of you know, take the risk of getting a lower performance. And also, there is uh work by very interesting work by my NYU colleague, former fair colleague actually, Saining Xie, uh uh something called ConvNeXt. So, he is sort of carefully fine-tuned the all the tricks, you know, in the convolutional net uh transposing some of the tricks that are used in transformer and say, "Look, you know, you actually get, you know, the same performance with ConvNeXts as you do with transformers if you do all the right tricks if you send the spend the same amount of effort on them." So, it's not there's nothing really intrinsic uh about the architecture there, uh at least for images and certainly for video. Um the thing is it starts getting impractical when you deal with video. If you have, you know, high resolution video, um high frame rate, then the number of tokens that you need to feed to your transformer for that becomes sort of impractically large. And so, then the

[00:43] computation is ridiculous. And here is a piece of data that's important. Every single real-time vision system uses convolutional nets. They don't use transformers. Your car, your self-driving car has in Europe, every car sold in Europe has to have a uh automatic emergency braking system. And it's a camera looking at the windshield uh that stops the car when there is an obstacle. Most of them have something that allows you to drive more or less automatically on the highway. Every single one of them uses convolutional net. Every single one of them. Because you need real time and you're not going to get that from transformers. At least not today. So, um you know, if we look at, you know, we're also embodied, obviously. Um we have our, you know, our brain up there that's helping us figure out how to act in the world. We're using, you know, whatever 20 watts of power for doing that. Um I think part of it is really to have a very adaptive, you know, level at which we actually read out the, you know, like abstraction level um

[00:44] um and so on. But like what do you see on the horizon? What are the kind of things that can bring us to or what is still missing actually? What what are the things that we should as a maybe research community really focus on uh to to to, you know, to get to something like that? It's a hardware issue. It's a it's actually a device issue. It's not just uh you know, computer architecture issue. &gt;&gt; the algorithms are solved? I mean, I think the algorithms are are not the issue the main issue for like power consumption. Here is the problem. Um the in the brain, The weights are in place. Uh The weights are in place. The weights are in place, right? Exactly. So, uh in the brain, you you know, the number of parameters in a neural net is like a synapse in the brain. It's not quite the same analogy, but let's let's make this assumption, right? Um So, we have one physical synapse and one physical [snorts] neuron per virtual neuron, if you want. Okay. Um

[00:45] Whereas in a computer implementation of a neural net or deep learning system, we reuse the same piece of hardware, the same silicon, to compute the output of multiple neurons and multiple synapses. Okay? So, what that means and the reason we need to do this is because our fabrication technology is too big and too fast. So, we have to use what's called hardware multiplexing. You have to reuse the same piece of hardware to compute multiple parts of of the neural net. And what that means is that you have to get data from memory and shuffle it through the computational engine, right? And put the result back to memory. All the energy, all the power is spent getting data from the memory and writing it back. So, the difference between a classical CPU and the GPUs that are optimized for for for neural nets is that the GPUs have this kind of hierarchical memory that allows to kind of minimize the amount of traffic to memories that is

[00:46] far away and slower so that you you save quite a bit of energy, but you cannot with current technology, you simply cannot have one computing device per neuron or synapse in your neural net. You would have to go to like some sort of exotic analog technology for this which does not exist, you know, it might pop up in the future. It could be spintronics, it could be carbon nanotubes, it could be, you know, whatever some optical widget, but it doesn't exist at the moment. If you're going to use CMOS, the technology is too big and too fast and you have to reuse the same piece of hardware for different parts of your neural net. You have to shuffle data. That's where all your energy is going to go. So, in other words, if we could have an analog asynchronous three-dimensional stacking of elements, we might actually get there. Yeah, and uh you know, possibly. And it would have to be it wouldn't have to be as fast as our current electronics because it would be massively parallel and way more than current systems. But you would need to

[00:47] &gt;&gt; do we run at? Uh we run at like 10 hertz. Okay. In the sense of your retina works at about 15 hertz, which is why, you know, cinema is at 24 frames per second because you can't see you know, uh you you perceive the frames as motion, right? Uh And and the the whole process of going from your retina to your if inferotemporal cortex or your motor cortex for reacting to a visual stimulus is is 100 milliseconds for perception, another 100 milliseconds to figure out what to do. So, your your feedback loop when you see an obstacle in the street and you need to brake, you know, hit the brake pedal for your for your car, that's like 300 milliseconds, a third of a second. Incredibly slow. Uh cats are faster. Okay, which is why because they have small brains, which is why, you know, they can stand in front of a cobra and when the cobra starts to attack, they go boom, right? We can't do this as humans. We're just too slow. Um so, uh you know, we we're going to require some

[00:48] some non-volatile memory storage technology that is incredibly compact, right? We're talking like, you know, nanometers for you know, a single analog memory type thing. Which, you know, biology figured out how to do, but we don't know what to do what to do with current fabrication. &gt;&gt; other part, so that would be like, you know, potentially like a frozen brain or something, right? A key thing about us is we can adapt. We can keep adjusting. We don't have to first learn and then, you know, infer. Well, this this thing would be would have to be, you know, to learn in the loop. In fact, there is this concept that people were, you know, kind of thinking of in the 1980s and and 90s where people were working on analog neural net implementations. And it was the fact that when you start to get to these small devices, the characteristic of each device is different. Um you have a lot of variability from one device to a to another on a single chip. And so, you can't just program the system with, you know, known weights that have been trained offline

[00:49] uh because the characteristic of the components uh vary so much. And so, you have to train the system in the loop with the characteristic of the of of the chip itself, which means that that system is not reproducible. It's unique. It's it's mortal, if you want. Okay? Like like human brain, you can't copy a make another copy of human brain. So, so okay. So, so, you know, like so essentially, what do you see on the like, you know, is there anything out there on the horizon where, you know, not not back to the hardware in in in the 80s or so, but more in in algorithmically of of bringing learning in the loop. Uh for you know, for embedded systems or for systems that act in the world and have to keep adjusting and also partially also based on their own um you know, like if we get hurt and then you know, like we can actually adapt and we change our gait a bit and this and that and so on. Um what's what's what's there? Like can we expect to see kind of learning systems

[00:50] in the loop essentially coming &gt;&gt; I think the answer is clearly yes and I actually don't think it's particularly challenging conceptual uh problem. I mean, I don't think we need to invent anything new to be able to do you know, online adaptation. We do this all the time, right? If uh you know, you you you try to pick up a pick up an object and you realize the object is like way heavier than you realize. This is actually way heavier than I thought. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; It's like pretty thick glass actually. Um and you know, you immediately adapt. Your world model that predicted like you know, how how much force you had to apply to lift this object you know, adapts in milliseconds. This is done actually most probably possibly not entirely clear but probably in the cerebellum. Cerebellum is a very special piece of the brain that actually has most of our neurons in a in a human brain actually in the cerebellum not in the cortex. Uh it's like 50 million neurons in the cerebellum only 16 million in the cortex which is weird. Uh but they you know, mostly the the

[00:51] theories about the cerebellum is fast adaptation to kind of changing situations. So again also when we observe something that violates our internal model of the world, we're programmed to pay attention to it because you know, we need to learn from it. Cuz that means our world model was inaccurate. Also, it could be a tiger jumping at us, right? That we didn't foresee. It can kill us, right? So we have to pay attention to uh distortion from prediction. So that's the cherry, right? That's not the cherry. That's the adjustment of your world model. It's not supervised. It's completely self-supervised. This is not related to a task. &gt;&gt; That's reinforcement learning, right? It's not reinforcement learning. Absolutely not. It's self-supervised learning. It's Okay, I observe something going on in the world and my prediction was wrong and now I wait a little. I observe what actually occurred. I adjust my prediction my predictor. You know, it's a Jeff architecture. There's no task to accomplish. There's no reinforcement. There's no value function. Nothing like that. Just prediction error. Okay? And you adapt your your model and that's generic. It doesn't it's not task dependent. Welcome to the AI House

[00:52] Davos. Our next panel on the summit stage will begin in 15 minutes. Okay, we still have I guess I guess we have some time. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Okay, so anyways, I think we have to wrap it up. So so maybe to finish um where do you see things like 10 years from now? Like in in embodied AI in particular, right? In terms of robots, in terms of what what can they do and what's still out what's still unsolved? So I'm I'm just you know, starting a a new very ambitious company uh with the idea that we're going to be able to solve that problem within a few years and basically have systems that understand the physical world or any modality you throw at them um can build world models, can use those world models to plan, uh can build hierarchical world models, so you can do hierarchical planning Mhm. and then basically be the blueprint for the future AI systems um that are much more powerful than you know, LLMs that we have currently. It's completely different paradigm, non-generative as I said because it's those Jeff architectures. Um

[00:53] not using autoregressive token prediction but using planning. Okay, so systems that can predict the consequences of their actions which I think is the only decent way to build agentic systems uh except for real world applications. And so I'm seeing a future where this is going to be the next AI revolution. Okay? We're going to have another AI revolution brought about by this and I'm building a company around this idea with and I think it's the right time to do it because we already have results that show that this approach works. You know, we can train from video. We get systems that have some level of common sense. We can train predictive models on top of them. World models, we can use them for planning. And so that points to the direction that you know, we we see a clear path to much more powerful AI systems than we currently have. When you say they're not generative, they're generative but across the different level at at different levels of abstraction in a sense. Well, generative my definition of generative is that you reproduce the input signals or you predict the input signals. Here you make predictions at representational level. Mhm. Okay? That's not generative

[00:54] in my in my world but Yeah, yeah, but I mean okay. Good. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.