# How I Beat 61 Teams at Robot Laundry Folding in Simulation (with RL) — Ilia Larchenko
# LeHome Challenge (ICRA 2026) Deep Dive, Part 1: Reinforcement Learning for VLAs. YouTube mTohakalKz8, uploaded 2026-07-19, 1:17:29.
# Author-provided English subtitles via yt-dlp, deduplicated into ~1-minute paragraphs.

[00:00] Hi, I'm Ilia. I haven't posted videos for a while because I've been participating in the LeHome Challenge, the competition in which I needed to train a bimanual robot like this to fold different types of garments, something like this. This competition consisted of two parts. The first part was in simulation, and I used a lot of reinforcement learning, combining both existing techniques and some new ideas that I came up with myself, and eventually I won this first part. The second part was offline, on site at ICRA, and I used a lot of human-in-the-loop interventions, like DAgger-style data collection, to improve my policy and to do this sim-to-real transfer. And eventually I got second place in this second phase of the competition. So I already open-sourced my solution, so you can find everything online. But in this video I want to go much deeper, and I want to explain why I made different choices, how I thought about this problem, what are the alternatives, 

[01:01] and why I chose the ones that I've chosen. And while preparing for it, I realized that it's like a lot of information — it will take hours to actually explain all these things. This is why I decided to split this video into three parts, and today will be the first part. In this part, I will talk about reinforcement learning, about the overall reinforcement learning loop that I used to train my policy. I will explain why many of the approaches that are kind of common in reinforcement learning are not very suitable for VLA training, and I will show which approaches actually work and what I've chosen. And finally, I'll talk about data collection. I will explain how I optimized the whole process, how I augmented all the rollouts to collect more diverse data, and what strategies I used to do it. And then of course I will talk about how all these things work together, how I organized the reinforcement learning loop that works completely asynchronously, where you can scale any part of it independently, and many other details.

[02:06] And then in the follow-up videos I will talk about reward engineering, about inference optimization, and then we will discuss the second round where I did a lot of sim-to-real and human-in-the-loop interventions. I will show how to move your policy from working in simulation to a real robot, and discuss all the problems that I faced and all the nice tricks that I learned. And let's begin. A good way to learn about a competition is simply to open its website and quickly go through all the materials that are presented here. They have this quick overview, then a more detailed explanation of two phases, and we will talk about the first one very soon. Then, of course, the competition ended, so you can see the leaderboard already here, and then some extra information, prizes, and so on, that you can find here. While we are at the bottom of this page, I want to say thank you to Lightwheel, who was a sponsor of this competition, then the organizing committee, 

[03:09] and of course all the organizers who helped to make it happen. I really enjoyed this competition, so thank you — thank you very much for organizing it and making it work. And now let's quickly go through the description of the first phase. The first phase is the simulation challenge. And in this phase we are given different garments of four different types: long-sleeve tops, short-sleeve tops, long pants, and shorts. And the idea is that we need to train this robot to fold these different garment types. We'll talk about data a little bit later. The one very important thing is that we look only at the full success rate. So we need this kind of garment to be completely folded to consider it a success, and this success is defined by different keypoints. So, for example, you could already see that there are two keypoints on the sleeves and they should be connected to each other, and then there are other keypoints 

[04:10] that are used to define whether we folded this shirt in half. And you can see that we automatically check distances between different keypoints — some of them should be very close, the distance should be below the threshold, and some of these points should be far away. So it means that we didn't just put everything together in one point, but the garment is spread out. I would say that it works pretty well, all the keypoints logic. Maybe there are other ways to actually fold the garments in real life, but particularly for this competition there was some standard approach, standard folding strategy, that we should have followed. So yeah, you can see how it works for the long and short sleeves, then now the pants, and finally you will see how to do it for shorts. So this is an example of a failure, because these two keypoints are a little bit too 

[05:11] far from each other, so this is not a completed task. Finally, the shorts are the simplest one — just fold them in one movement. And in this case this is an example of success. This is what you need to know about the rules themselves, how we can see whether the episode is successful or not. For more information you can look at the actual rollouts. So the data provided by the organizers is shared on Hugging Face. For example, this is a top view of part of the data shared there. For some reason it's flipped 180 degrees, so when I trained my models I kind of flipped it back, but yeah, this is just the decision to put the camera this way. So basically we have a lot of rollouts like this that we can use for the initial behavioral cloning. Sometimes they're better quality, sometimes you see there is one episode where the sleeve was a little bit outside, 

[06:11] so it probably was on the very, very edge of success. And so we basically have this dataset for different types of garments that we can start our training from. Finally, there is a repository with all the code needed to start competing in this challenge. So this code provides you the environment for the simulation, where you can run your policies to evaluate them or to collect more data. Also, they provide some starting model-training logic. You can use models that already exist in the repo and just follow the instructions to train your first version of this model. And of course they provide all other instructions and extra details, as well as information on how to submit your solution for the actual competition. If you want to know more about the competition, the rules, the environment, and so on, I would just recommend you to simply go here and try to run it yourself, or just read through it to understand more details.

[07:14] At this point you may ask, why is this competition hard? So this task of cloth folding is not something unsolvable. If you look at the past, maybe three or four years ago, it was a very, very hard task, but then recently, when we started to use all of these end-to-end policies, different VLAs and so on, different labs started to actually show demos where they managed to solve this problem. So why is it hard here? So first of all, this problem is kind of solvable now, but it's not trivial. I still see demos of some robotics companies that are trying to do it and it doesn't work well — it works well sometimes. Indeed, some people kind of solved it, but it's not like everybody can solve it 100% of the time. The second one, of course, is that this is a competition. So it's not like I need to make a demo that works once — I need to train a policy that consistently can solve 

[08:16] this problem again and again and again, and do it better than other competitors. Third: we need to use these robots, and these are pretty cheap robots. They have some problems, like backlash, or sometimes they cannot properly grab the fabric because of this gripper, and so on. And we cannot modify the hardware in any way, because — again, I've seen some demos where people fold t-shirts with this robot, and then they put it slightly differently, and so on, and then find the best configuration, how to set it up to make it work. Again, that wasn't an option for us in this competition. So we needed to just put it in some particular setup with exact positions of all the robots and so on. And of course you cannot change the gripper or any other things, because you need to run it on the organizers' setup. And then this is the next problem, that I just mentioned: in the finals we needed to run it 

[09:18] on the setup, on the robot, that we've never touched and never seen. So I have this robot here, but again, because they're very, very cheap, every time you assemble it, every time you calibrate it, every time you use a slightly different camera mount, they work slightly differently. And we needed to train a policy that generalizes well enough to work on a different robot from the same family, but with a slightly different camera, with different colors. For example, the final robot was orange and I have red robots here, and so on. So there are a lot of challenges to train a pretty robust policy. I just wanted to remind you that I already open-sourced my whole solution for both phases, and you can find everything online. So first of all, I have this blog post. It has a lot of visuals and a high-level explanation of my solution, with some details of the most important things that I implemented. So if you want to know the rest of the story before I release my videos, 

[10:24] then you can definitely open it and check it with more examples, and quickly at least read through it. If you want to know more details, I also published the whole tech report on arXiv, with much more detail, with much more explanation of what exactly was done. So again, for more deep dives, you can always refer to this paper. And finally, I released all the code, so you can reproduce everything that I'm talking about here. So everything that I implemented is available on GitHub. So feel free to try to train your own model or run some evaluations with checkpoints that I also share. And if you have any questions related to it, please don't hesitate to ask me. When I first saw the announcement of this competition, I was looking for a playground where I could test some ideas that I had in my head about reinforcement learning 

[11:25] for VLAs. And this problem sounds very nice, because on the one hand it's not trivial, it's a relatively hard problem, but at the same time the episodes are pretty short. So in terms of compute — for example, GPUs — I don't need a whole cluster to train these models, I don't need a whole cluster to collect the data. We are talking about, I don't know, 10-20 second episodes, which is again not super short, but not super long, so we don't waste a lot of resources on this training. So again, it felt like a very, very nice playground for reinforcement learning. So I originally joined the competition for the first round mostly. But then, of course, there was the second round, with a lot of sim-to-real and DAgger data collection, and other interesting things that I also wanted to experiment with someday, and it was just nice that everything was combined. It was like one big experience, to do all the things.

[12:25] So this is some rationale about the competition, about why I think it's interesting, what was my motivation for this. And now let's start talking about the solution, and let's go deeper into the reinforcement learning part and discuss how it works and how I applied it in this case. First of all, the common reinforcement learning loop is to train your policy on some data that you usually have in the beginning, then collect rollouts using this policy, then train a value or Q model using these collected rollouts, and then use the predictions of this model and the collected dataset to train the policy again and improve it. And then you keep repeating it again and again and again, and eventually your policy becomes better. So this is more or less how most of the reinforcement learning policies work. I decided to kind of simplify this process. So the first thing that I did, I combined the policy and value function together. We'll talk about it a little bit later, but my value predictions 

[13:28] are coming from the same model that the action predictions come from — the policy itself. So now I have only two parts, two streams of work. One is the policy and value training in one go, and another one is rollout collection. And these are two different types of tasks to do. In many cases, again, when you look at the mainstream approaches in reinforcement learning, they are run sequentially. So you train the policy, collect rollouts, and so on, and it's not very efficient, especially given that you need to use different types of GPUs, different machines, for these two tasks. And maybe if you do it in one machine, it's not optimal in general. I wanted to make it as asynchronous and as distributed as possible. This is why I put these repositories between them. So I use Hugging Face repositories for models and data, and 

[14:30] I put them in between these two processes and made them completely isolated from each other. So the policy and value training process never talks to the rollout collection process, and vice versa. They simply interact through the Hugging Face Hub. Let's add a little bit more detail and talk about it one by one. So first of all, we have a training machine. In my case, I use a machine with one H200. But if you want to scale it, you can just use a more powerful machine with more powerful GPUs, or maybe, I don't know, eight GPUs in one machine, and it will work out of the box. So this machine, at any point in time, downloads any new datasets in the data repository, then computes some statistics and computes advantages based on everything in this dataset, without actually using any predictions of any model, and then runs the training loop. So it uses this new dataset, combines it with the old datasets, and runs some steps of training, and then usually, 

[15:30] every half an hour to an hour, it generates a new checkpoint and uploads it back to the Hugging Face repository — but this time a different repository, the repository with the model. And then there's the second part, which is the rollout machine, or machines. You can use any number of machines you want for this, because again, everything is completely independent and asynchronous. I mostly used my RTX PRO 6000 machine, and also sometimes a little bit different, and sometimes I used more machines when I wanted to collect more rollouts faster. But each of these machines completely independently downloads the latest checkpoint from the model repository, runs evaluation — so collects new rollouts — makes predictions of value and completion, something that we'll discuss later in this video, and then uploads all these new rollouts, with some extra things like identified hard states and so on, to the data repository. And then this cycle simply begins again. So the main idea here is that these workers don't wait for each other. Whenever you 

[16:34] start rollout collection, you just use the latest model checkpoint available. You don't care what's happening on the training side. Whenever you do training, you just use all the data available at this point. You don't care what's happening on the rollout side, or whether rollouts even exist. Maybe you can stop all the rollouts and train the model more, or you can stop all the training and collect more rollouts if you think that one is going behind the other. This is the main point. So my approach, my pipeline, is completely asynchronous. Nothing waits for each other, everything works with the latest data or models available, and it's very easy to scale any part of this pipeline. Technically, there is also a third part. It's manual teleoperation and DAgger data collection. So this also can run completely independently. It doesn't need any model, but it can take the recent hard cases stored in the data repo, and then you can collect new rollouts by manually controlling 

[17:34] the robot in simulation using the leader arms. And I initially thought it will have a big impact on the final solution. In practice, even though I collected some rollouts, it wasn't so important. I will talk about it later. It was very, very important to collect these DAgger rollouts in the real second round, and I will talk a lot about it in the second video, but it wasn't so important for simulation. And just for the sake of time, I decided to move this discussion about the simulation DAgger data collection to the second video as well, because it wasn't really a big part of this story here. So you can keep in the back of your mind that I did collect some rollouts manually, but it wasn't a big deal here, so we can kind of forget about it until the end of this video. But now let's talk about the actual reinforcement learning approach that I used, because not every 

[18:34] approach can actually be applied in the pipeline that I've just discussed. Before we begin, I just wanted to quickly go through the glossary of reinforcement learning, to make sure that we speak the same language, and then show some mini-examples. So first of all, the policy is basically our model that decides what actions to take next. The reward is our feedback that we instantly get at any step, and then if you accumulate this reward over the whole trajectory starting from the current point, we'll get the return, and the return is what we actually optimize — this is what we want to maximize in the end. Then the value function is the expected return that we will receive starting from the current state. And the Q value is the expected return that we will receive starting from the current state if we make one particular, already pre-selected, next action. And finally, the advantage is the difference of these two values. I will use a lot of these terms during the explanation, so I wanted to list them here.

[19:35] But now let's look at the actual example, and repeat these definitions again to make sure that everybody understands them. So in the beginning our environment starts from some state, and in this state we can take different actions, and our policy is something that predicts the distribution of these actions and then somehow samples from this distribution and selects the particular action. Then when we move, for example, from state zero to state one, we get some reward R0. When we move to state two, we receive some reward, and so on. And then this reward gets accumulated, and if we sum up discounted rewards, we will get our return, and this is our final target that we are trying to maximize in reinforcement learning. Then, if we just think about all possible trajectories that can go from some state, average them, or compute the expected value of the return from them, we will get our value function. If we do the same with one pre-selected action first, 

[20:36] we will get the Q function. And finally, if we look at the difference between these two values, Q minus V, we'll get the advantage. Advantage shows how much the current action is better than the average action, in terms of the expected return that we will get from the current state. I hope now everybody is on the same page, and we can go deeper into the discussion about the algorithms. First of all, before going to reinforcement learning, let's remind ourselves what behavioral cloning is. So behavioral cloning is not a reinforcement learning approach. It's more like a supervised machine learning approach, where you have some training data and then you train the model to replicate this data. In our case, we have some data of, maybe, a teleoperated robot, or maybe collected by other policies, or maybe some rollouts, and we train the policy to replicate the actions that were taken by whatever was used to collect the initial training data. So you can say that you have an initial training dataset D, consisting of states and actions 

[21:37] taken in these states. And in other words, you can say that you have this implied policy mu, so even if the data was collected by a human or by a mix of policies and so on, you can always say that there's some implied policy that would collect equivalent data. And then basically your policy that you are training is trying to replicate this implied policy, is trying to replicate the behavior of whatever was used to collect the original data. Depending on the model that you use, you will train it a little bit differently. So, for example, if you train a discrete model to predict discrete actions, you will probably maximize log-probabilities of every action taken given the current state. If you train some regression, then you will try to predict some average action taken in similar states. But this is not a popular way to do it in robotics, so we will talk about the second one. So when you think about all the formulas in the future, it's much simpler actually to think 

[22:40] about them as if we're solving a discrete problem, because I think a lot of these original approaches were derived for discrete problems, but they work kind of the same for continuous actions as well. But again, when you're thinking about overall concepts, this discrete action space sounds much, much easier. So I recommend thinking in discrete terms when you think about formulas, but then go back to the continuous when you really need to train the model. But the flow matching that we use — and that many other models in robotics use nowadays, it's a common choice of the action head, of the action expert — works differently. So it's not discrete, it predicts continuous actions, but it doesn't actually predict actions. So flow matching predicts some velocity field, basically some process that can transform any distribution into any other distribution. In practice, we mostly start from the normal distribution and 

[23:47] transform this normal distribution into the target distribution. We have some normal distribution, we sample any point in this normal distribution, and then this prediction of velocity is basically some bunch of vectors that guide how this point should move in space to land somewhere in the target distribution. And then if you apply the same logic to all the possible sampled points from the initial normal distribution, we will eventually generate our target distribution. And this is how this model is trained. So when it's trained, we just minimize an MSE loss in this velocity space. During rollout, we sample any random vector from the normal distribution and apply these velocities, this process, to transform it into the final prediction, into the target distribution. This is nice during rollout, because during rollout we just need one action chunk, one point, to use to execute. But it's not very good for reinforcement learning, and we will see 

[24:49] it very soon. And the problem is that we never explicitly model the target distribution. What we learn to do with flow matching is to sample from the target distribution, but we cannot, for example, predict the probability density for some action in the target distribution. This is not how it works. And again, it will define a lot of our choices on the following slides. And I think this applying of reinforcement learning to flow matching is not a completely solved problem. There are a lot of new ideas there, there are a lot of difficulties because of this approach. So it's a very interesting area right now, because on the one hand everybody is using it for behavior cloning, on the other hand reinforcement learning seems very promising, but it's very hard to use reinforcement learning for flow matching. So overall it's a very, very interesting field. Okay, so we talked about behavioral cloning. Behavioral cloning, again, is something that tries to replicate the expert behavior, the expert approach, but it's not what we want in the end. So in the end we want our policy to act better than the expert. So we want our policy to be, 

[25:54] I don't know, faster, higher success rate, maybe improve some other metrics. And this is why we need to use reinforcement learning here. And the reinforcement learning idea is: instead of trying to mimic the expert, let's try to directly optimize what we want. So if we can engineer some reward and return that actually correlates with what we want to get in the very end, let's just train the model to directly maximize this value as much as possible. In most of the reinforcement learning approaches, this formula here is the return, missing some of these discounting factors to make it simpler. So this return is what we're trying to maximize, and then there are different approaches for how to do it. So approach number one is on-policy methods. On-policy means that you use very fresh, current-policy data. So you have your current policy, you collect some rollouts, then using some formulas that you can see on 

[26:58] this slide, you can actually directly compute the gradient of the policy towards the direction of improvement of the return. You take the rollouts of your policy, and again, mathematically you can show what is the direction of the policy change that will lead to higher return. There are a couple of things here. So first of all, you can see that the first formula doesn't have any return anymore. It switched from optimizing expected return to optimizing expected advantage at each step. I will not prove this formula here, but it's a fundamental observation. So instead of maximizing return, you can maximize the relative goodness of every action at every step, and this is an equivalent problem that eventually leads to a higher reward. And yeah, in most of the cases we simply switch from return optimization to advantage optimization. This is how it works. And then the second formula represents the exact formula of the policy gradient for the maximization of return.

[28:02] First of all, I mentioned that you need very fresh policy data, and technically this data should be extremely fresh. So it means that when you collected some rollouts, and then you run optimization, and then you make one gradient step, your policy already changed. So after the first gradient step you're already dealing with another policy, and technically you cannot use the on-policy methods anymore. As soon as you made your first step, it's not on-policy anymore. So you literally need to collect rollouts, make one step, and then collect the rollouts again. It's extremely inefficient in terms of data collection. The second thing: if you look at these formulas, you see this probability, or probability density, of selecting some particular action given the state, or even log-probabilities here. And as I told you before, flow matching cannot predict these probabilities. So flow matching just samples from the distribution. Flow matching cannot tell you what the probability is to sample this action, what the 

[29:05] log-probability is, what the probability density is for this action. And this is a fundamental part of this formula. So you literally cannot apply this formula to flow matching directly. Let's look at some other approaches. This on-policy recency data requirement is very strict, so in practice we want to relax it. We want to be able to use slightly older data, and at least collect fresh data and then do a few steps to update the policy. This is where this kind of "less on-policy," let's call it, methods become useful. So technically they are still attributed to on-policy, but they have some off-policy features. The most popular idea for how to improve this data efficiency is to add this extra correction with pi-theta, that basically represents the probability that this action would be selected by our old policy that was used for the data collection. And it's a very, 

[30:05] very widely used approach, and one of the most popular methods in this family is PPO. It's used basically everywhere nowadays. It uses the same approach but adds some extra tricks, extra clipping, and it allows us to train our policy for more steps from the data that is collected once. They still require you to collect data with your current policy, then make some number of optimization steps, and then completely discard all the old samples, and then collect new data and keep training on this new data, again and again. It's much more data efficient when we do it in this way, in this PPO way. But it still requires a lot of data. Another problem that we discussed before, and that still exists here, is that we need to predict these probabilities. So again, this pi represents either the probability or probability density of different policies — either the one that was used to collect the data, or the one that is optimized 

[31:07] right now. And again, we don't know these probabilities, we don't know these predictions when we use flow matching. So you cannot really apply flow matching directly using these formulas. It's a very, very fast developing area, and there are approaches that are trying to apply PPO to flow matching, or diffusion, or some similar models. But the problem with all of them, or at least the ones that I'm aware of, is that they're not really directly applying PPO to the original problem. Usually what they do is they make the problem a little bit more complex. They add some extra steps, or they make some approximations, and then they apply PPO to this approximated problem, or this changed problem. And again, it doesn't directly do the same thing that PPO does. So I would say that this PPO over flow matching is not 100% solved, even though there is some progress and there are some approaches that people are trying to use. But I didn't use them. I decided to go for a different approach, and I'm using this Advantage-Weighted Regression policy, 

[32:15] and this is a policy from the off-policy methods. It doesn't require you to use very, very recent data from the very recent policy. It can accumulate a dataset, it can collect data from different policies. And I would say that this approach even works offline. So even if you cannot collect any new data at all, but you already have some dataset, you can apply this method on top of this dataset and train a policy that is better than behavior cloning. So this is nice. This is what we want, because our data is kind of expensive, and it's often the case in robotics — you don't want to discard old rollouts half an hour after you collected them because they're not on-policy anymore. So you want some policy that can actually deal with old data, especially data collected by other policies, by people, by human-in-the-loop using some DAgger things, and so on. So this approach fits much, much better to our needs. Let's look at it. So first of all, look at the formula on the left. You may see 

[33:18] that we don't have pi-old anymore, and pi-old is replaced with mu everywhere, but it's basically the same formula. So just before, we assumed that we have some very recent policy that we use to collect the data. Here we don't have this policy explicitly, but we again can assume that we have some dataset, and this dataset has some implicit policy mu that represents some combined policy that was used to collect this dataset. But again, this formula is very, very similar to what we've just seen. And the main addition here is this KL divergence, that shows how our new policy pi differs from this policy mu. And if you add this constraint that says that this KL divergence should be below some epsilon, then you can derive the closed-form solution for this problem. I'm not deriving it here, but it's actually a nice exercise, so you can just try to do it. If you do it by hand, you'll probably understand better how it works and why. But I'm just showing the solution here. And this solution 

[34:23] is very nice for us, because it doesn't require us to predict any probabilities anymore. What it says basically is that the optimal policy that solves this problem above is simply a reweighted mu. So if you have this mu distribution and you reweight it with weights proportional to the exponent of the advantage divided by some constant, then you will get a new distribution, and our new policy basically should sample from this distribution. And as we remember, our flow matching approach is good at sampling from any distribution, and it doesn't really care from what distribution to sample, and this is exactly what we need to do. So we just need to train the model that samples from a new distribution. Instead of sampling from mu, like behavioral cloning is doing, we need to sample from this reweighted mu, where the high-advantage actions have higher weights. So you can see that this approach doesn't have these two problems that we've just discussed 

[35:23] in on-policy methods. So it doesn't require us to predict directly any probabilities, and it allows us to use all data, even if it's collected without any policy, but with humans or someone else. This is very, very good, and this is exactly what we need in this case. Specifically for this closed-form solution, if you're using flow matching, it's extremely trivial to make flow matching sample from this new weighted distribution instead of the original distribution. To do it, we simply need to add one weight. So we simply need to add this exponent in our loss function that we're optimizing, and it's done. Literally, it's the same process as behavior cloning. No other changes — just we add one extra weight to our loss, and magically the policy that we train starts to be better than the original policy that is implied for our collected dataset. That is very cool, and 

[36:25] it directly allows us to use flow matching for this reinforcement learning problem. In practice, I also clip the advantage, and I use beta equals 1, so my formula looks like this. And an even bigger change that I implemented in practice: instead of using these weights during training time, instead of using the weights in the loss function itself, I keep the loss function exactly the same as in normal behavior cloning, without any changes at all. But I apply these weights during sampling. Whenever my data loader samples from some dataset, it samples proportionally to this exponent of clipped advantage, rather than sampling uniformly. So I believe it's even more efficient, because if you have some very, very bad actions in this top approach, we will sample this data, load it, and then train the model with an extremely low weight for this particular sample. In the second approach, we just never — or very rarely — even 

[37:27] sample such bad actions, and we have more variance of better actions in every batch that we use. So I think it works a little bit better. Again, I didn't ablate it properly, but I believe that this weighting through sampling is just more efficient than weighting in the actual loss. This is literally the only change that I needed to do. I just needed to add extra sampling-probability logic to the data loader, and then run the same pipeline that I use for behavioral cloning. Now let's look at a very simple example of how it works in practice, if we simplify everything as much as possible. Let's say that we have a distribution of data that has both good and bad actions. Bad actions are red here, the good actions are green. They all have some advantage. Good actions mostly have positive advantage, bad actions mostly have negative advantage. There is some spillover just because advantage estimation is always noisy — we never perfectly measure it. If we train our behavioral cloning policy, it will kind of resemble this distribution. 

[38:30] But now we add some weighting, and as soon as we apply this weighting, the target distribution gets rebalanced, and all the actions with positive advantage, or high advantage, get much higher weight, and eventually our distribution moves towards the right side, moves towards the good actions. Again, this is a very, very simplified example. In practice, of course, the process is much more complicated, and of course it's not one-dimensional. But the high-level idea is like this: learn good actions a bit more often, bad actions a bit less often. Okay, but this AWR is not the only logic that I used. I combined it with another policy that is called RECAP, and this policy is proposed by Physical Intelligence in the Pi0.6-star paper. I would recommend you to read this paper to get the actual logic, derivation, and formulas. But what I found is that their derivation is a little bit overcomplicated, 

[39:30] because they derive it with very, very general assumptions, and then they apply some simplified assumptions in the end and make everything much, much simpler. In my explanation, I want to start with these already-simplified things and just explain the intuition behind RECAP. But again, you can find the whole derivation later in the original paper. Let's look at our mu, this implied policy of the training data. You can use this total probability formula to split it into two parts. One is the distribution of actions with high advantage, multiplied by the share of good actions with high advantage, plus the distribution of actions with bad advantage, multiplied by the corresponding probability. It's very, very similar to what I just showed you in the previous example, with these red and green actions with different advantage values. You can see that there is this conditional distribution of only good actions, and in practice this is what we want to predict. So we want our 

[40:33] policy to predict only good actions. We don't want our policy to predict bad actions at all. And why don't we just train this model, train our policy, to predict them? So actually there are, I think, approaches that try to do exactly this — try to predict exactly the only-good actions, train only on good actions — but I think they're losing eventually, because the bad actions still have some important information. They have information about the overall distribution, and so on, and they also show the policy that "oh, these are the possible states," and actually the policy can sometimes learn what would be the good actions for these states, even if it didn't see it in the training data. So it's not necessarily good to completely throw away all the bad actions. And this is what RECAP is doing. So RECAP is training the same policy, the same model, in two modes. Mode number one is the unconditional pass, when we don't send any extra inputs. And in 

[41:33] this case our policy that we train simply predicts the implied data policy — that's exactly what we have in the behavioral cloning approach. And then we also train the conditional pass. In this case we provide one extra input to the policy, and literally ask the policy to predict only good actions, only this orange part of the formula above. And this conditional, good-action pass is sharing the same weights, it's using exactly the same model as the first pass, but it gets one extra input that literally tells the policy to predict better actions, predict only good actions. And surprisingly, the policy does it. So surprisingly, the policy starts to predict better actions when you simply ask it to predict better actions. And then during the actual rollout we don't need the unconditional pass — we use only the conditional pass, and we just say "predict good actions," and the policy predicts good actions. In practice, 

[42:34] we can go even further and we can apply classifier-free guidance to make good actions even better, and I will talk about it in the inference optimization section. Now let's look at the same example but applying RECAP logic instead. So when we move this epsilon to the right and increase it, we force the model to predict more and more of the high-advantage action distribution rather than any other action distribution. And again we shift the weight of the good actions in the final predictions higher and higher. Now let's compare these two approaches. On the left is the formula that you've already seen. On the right is a formula that you can get if you try to actually derive what RECAP is eventually doing — and you can find it, again, in the original paper. And the idea is that they're actually doing very similar things. So on the left, we take the original implied policy and reweight it with the advantage, with the exponent of the advantage. And on the right, 

[43:36] you do very similar weighting, but we weight with the probability that the advantage is higher than some threshold. In practice, this probability function can be like a step function, but because of the noisiness of all these advantages and so on, it's maybe more smooth. But again, the idea is that we simply reweight the target distribution with slightly different logic, and in both cases we get better results than the original policy. And in my final solution, I simply combine these two approaches together. I just use them simultaneously. So on the one hand my baseline prediction of the model gets better because of advantage weighting, and on the other hand I still have this extra conditioned pass that predicts even better actions, and also unblocks this classifier-free guidance that I will discuss later to predict very, very good actions. And I think this combination actually 

[44:36] has these additional benefits, and it's a very good idea to combine them together. One extra thing that I like in this approach is that these approaches are not punishing bad actions. They're just redistributing the weights. And it's nice, because imagine that you use any other approach, and many of these approaches, they increase the probability of good actions whenever they see good actions — that is fine — but when they see bad actions, they reduce the probability of bad actions. And the problem is that we are dealing with a very high-dimensional space. Imagine in our problem we have two arms, total 12 degrees of freedom. We predict 30 steps forward, so we have 360 numbers that we predict at every model forward pass. It means that our predictions sit inside this 360-dimensional space. But the actual manifold that contains the reasonable actions, the reasonable action sequences, 

[45:40] is much, much smaller — just a very, very tiny subset in this high-dimensional space. The problem is that when we discourage the model from predicting bad actions, there is no guarantee that we will stay in the same manifold. So we'll reduce the probability to predict this bad action in the future, but this probability will be spread across all other actions. In a good scenario, yes, it will just move to the good actions. But again, in many cases it's not guaranteed. So these actions, this probability, can just flow to completely nonsensical actions. That is not nice. And in the case of these approaches, like RECAP or Advantage-Weighted Regression, we are not discouraging bad actions. We simply move probability towards good actions. Even when we have a bad action, we train to replicate this bad action — it just happens not so often. So I think it helps in the sense that we are not going away, we are not going away from the manifold.

[46:47] But on the other hand, it's actually a problem, because these approaches don't have any natural discovery, don't have any natural exploration. So our policy will never try anything new, ever. And this is a limitation that I also faced, because I've seen literally zero exploration in my approach. So the model never learned new behavior. It was just improving to do the stuff that was already seen in the training data, and managed to do it better and better and better over time, but it never learned any new tricks. Okay, so there were a bunch of formulas. I definitely didn't go very, very deep into all the reinforcement learning details. It will take many hours to explain everything in reinforcement learning. I will actually refer you to the Stanford course from Chelsea Finn, in the description. I think it's one of the best courses in reinforcement learning that you can find online right now. So if you want to know much more details about it and how all the things work, 

[47:50] I encourage you to watch it. It's very, very cool, I really liked it. So let me just maybe give some intuitive summary of what we just discussed. So there are a lot of approaches in reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning generally tries to improve on top of the collected data and train the policy that directly maximizes the reward that we can get in the future. And many approaches are not applicable when we use flow matching as our final action prediction head, and this is exactly what we are doing here. So I propose to use approaches that are completely usable with flow matching, because instead of trying to predict some policy gradient, they just try to reweight the target distribution, and then simply use flow matching to learn this distribution. And I'm arguing that a combination of these approaches is even better, and we can use them together to achieve a better result. This is basically the main logic of my solution.

[48:52] And now let's discuss the architecture of the policy that I used. My policy is based on Pi0.5. You can see that it consists of this main VLM part, that is trained on top of PaliGemma, which consists of Gemma and SigLIP, and it also has this flow matching action expert. It's taken directly from Pi0.5. But I didn't start from the raw Pi0.5. I used the solution of the BEHAVIOR challenge that my team won last year. We also used Pi0.5 as a baseline back then, but we introduced a lot of changes into the architecture. I basically used all of them in this competition as well, with some small changes. So if you want to know more, I would recommend just referring to my video about the BEHAVIOR challenge, and here I will talk more about the extra changes that I introduced for this LeHome competition. We already discussed that our policy should be able to make two types of prediction. One 

[49:57] is the general, behavioral-cloning mode, and the second one is conditioned by the high-advantage input. And to do it, we need to add an extra input. So here I simply add one more vector, one more token input, to the VLM part, call it "advantage" here — but it's actually an advantage indicator, a trained embedding that I send to the policy only when I need to predict good actions. When I need to predict any average actions, I simply don't send this vector as input at all. Then, and this is a pretty big addition, I have multiple auxiliary predictions that are predicted directly from the model itself. So as I said, I combine value function prediction with the actual policy into one model. So I don't have any specific value function. On top of it I add some extra predictions that are also used in the final prediction logic. There are three new input vectors, and I use the transformer output of these vectors to make these auxiliary predictions.

[51:03] Let's talk about them one by one, starting from the current query. So the current query is the vector that is inserted into the VLM right after the images. So it can see only images and nothing else. And it makes a lot of predictions related to the current state of the environment and the current state of the garment. First of all, it's predicting garment type — I'll discuss a little bit later how I use it. Then it predicts success probability. This is a very important part of my value function: basically, given the images, what is the probability that we will successfully complete this task? Then it predicts completion. Again, given the images, and given that we'll actually complete this task in the end, what is the current completion percentage? And then the last one — sorry for jumping — the last one is time to completion. It's some kind of combination of success probability and completion, and this is what Physical Intelligence in Pi0.6 uses as a value function, or at least something very close to what they use, again with some corrections. I tried to use it and I had some experiments, 

[52:09] but actually I didn't have enough time. So now it's more like a legacy prediction for me. And I also tried some other things, like checkpoint success probability predictions and so on. So in my code you will see some legacy things that I tried to predict, and I didn't remove them completely, but I didn't really use them in the follow-up logic of the policy. And now the keypoint distances are actually very interesting. So this is something that I would call a cheap replacement of a world model in this case. So originally I wanted to add some world model head to my policy. The world model is a kind of model that, given the current state and action, predicts what will be the future state of the system after you apply the actions. There are different approaches to these world models. Sometimes they predict pixel-level world models, sometimes they deal with some latent space, but in both cases you will need quite big models to either do pixel-level predictions or to transform everything to the latent space, and so on. 

[53:13] So you need to run all these computations during training, and I saw that it would be a lot of waste of resources. And instead I wanted to do something very, very cheap that directionally does the same, and I realized that predicting keypoint distances is something that can work. So again, remember that the success of completion of the task is defined by positions of different keypoints of the garment, and these distances between these keypoints, that I used to compute the success, are very important parts of the state itself. So if you want to predict the future or current state, we don't really care too much about a lot of things that we can see on the images, but we care a lot about these distances between different keypoints. So I simply added all these distances as targets for my model. And in this case, in the case of the current query, I just predict the current keypoint distances, just to train the model to understand what I mean by these 

[54:17] keypoint distances. But in the two other inputs, I predict the future positions of these keypoints, that we will see after applying all our actions. And this is exactly what a world model does — just instead of the whole state of the system, I predict this subset that is described by keypoint distances. But I think it's a very, very good and cheap substitute for the world model. Okay, now let's look at these two other vectors, like the FAST query and the flow matching query. So these vectors are attached at the end of the FAST action prediction, or at the end of the flow matching head, and they can see everything — all the inputs and the corresponding action predictions. And I use these tokens to make predictions of basically the same things as the current query does, but in the future. So first of all, I predict the success delta. It's something 

[55:24] between a Q and an advantage prediction, directly. So I predict what is the change in the success probability if we add all the actions and so on as inputs, on top of what we predicted already based on only images. So again, if the images predict something like a value function, then this one predicts not even Q, but more like advantage directly, something very, very similar. If you're applying some actions that are increasing success probability, these are good actions; if you want to execute some actions that reduce success probability, these are bad actions. Then I predict completion — just directly the future completion that we will get after this step. And finally, I already mentioned these keypoint distances: again, after we apply the whole predicted action chunk, what will be the distances between all the main keypoints that we see. Now let's talk about the garment type. So I mentioned that I make this garment type prediction, and the reason is because we don't really get the garment type as an input when we 

[56:29] execute the model, when we evaluate our submissions. So I implemented something very similar to this simple "System 2" from our BEHAVIOR solution in the past. So I make the prediction of the garment type during the first few frames, the first few predictions of every episode, and then simply use this prediction as an input for the rest of the episode, and feed it back inside the model. So you can see that it works a little bit like a System 2 in the very beginning of the task: it decides what exactly it should fold and then gives this input to the model. In practice, I'm not sure if it's important, because these predictions are very, very good. Even when you apply the prediction in the middle or at the end of the episode, it works very well — there's 99-something accuracy, and so on. So maybe if I didn't do it, there would be absolutely no effect. But again, I somehow started to do it from the beginning, and only very late 

[57:30] realized that probably it's not so important. So this is a bit of legacy logic that cannot be removed, because then the policy will not work properly. But in some cases, when the actual task definition is harder, maybe it makes sense to use this kind of prediction from the policy itself. And then finally I realized that when I provide just one vector for garment type, or one vector for advantage, as an input, it's not enough, because all the other inputs, all the other tokens in the VLM part, can simply dominate because of their quantity, and your final action predictions, your final flow matching action expert, is not conditioned enough by these inputs. On top of these inputs to the VLM, I added an extra direct input to the flow matching through AdaRMS. I will not explain what it is — it's just a way to condition your flow matching, or your transformer, by predicting some bias, 

[58:33] some scale, and so on. So this AdaRMS was already used inside Pi0.5 to provide the time conditioning for flow matching. I simply added two other factors to it, and I believe that this conditioning became better. But again, this is one of the things that I didn't properly ablate. And finally, let's quickly look at the attention mask. So the attention is not strictly autoregressive, not strictly bidirectional — it has a few blocks. The first block is the images and the current query that I discussed, so the current query cannot see anything else, it can see only images as an input. The next block is state and garment type. So the garment type obviously should follow the current query, otherwise the current query will simply look at it for the predictions. But the state is in this block just because it's a bit less reliable — it's usually more noisy, and I don't want any of the current query predictions to overfit to the state. So this is why I put it in a separate block. And then advantage is the 

[59:34] last one. Nothing can look at the advantage during the prediction. And then finally, the FAST and the flow matching action predictions can see everything before them, but they cannot look at each other. So these are two completely independent branches that predict actions separately. That's it. This is how attention works in this case. This is my final policy architecture that I used in this competition. If you want more details, please refer to my tech report and the actual code — you can see the actual implementation, how all of it is done. Now let's talk about rollout collection. This is the second big part of the whole reinforcement learning cycle. So the idea, again, of the whole approach is that we train the model, train this policy, it gets better and better. Then we collect more data, more rollouts, and then use these rollouts to make the policy even better. So remember, our policy works in such a way that now it's trained on some dataset, and it eventually becomes slightly better than the 

[60:40] policy that collected this dataset. So if you just keep repeating it, keep running it again and again and again, it starts to improve more and more and more, and eventually evolves into a very, very nice, robust, and stable policy. And this is exactly what I've done. There are a lot of technical optimizations that I did, because this data collection is kind of a bottleneck. It takes around, maybe, 30 seconds to collect one episode on average, so it takes significant time. I tried to make this simulation collection as fast as possible, as optimized as possible. So I played a lot with resolutions and cameras. I tried to adjust some parameters of the overall environment and simulation to make it a bit faster. I played with the format that I used to save videos, because even video saving actually takes some time after the rollout is finished. I implemented multiple workers that are working in parallel and running 

[61:42] multiple simulations simultaneously. I also implemented some things like episode cut-out, when I see that the policy is already stuck and doing nothing, but there are still 10 seconds left — I don't wait for these 10 seconds, I just stop right there, and so on and so forth. So I did a lot of small optimizations, and I encourage you to look into the code to actually learn about them. But today I want to talk more about the high-level strategic decisions that I made. And two main things there: augmentations, or domain randomization — I think it's a more popular term in robotics, but it's very, very similar to the augmentation world — and the second one is the rollout collection strategies. Let's start from the augmentations. Image augmentation is a very, very old and classic technique in computer vision, and in all computer vision tasks it's used all the time, everywhere. 

[62:46] So it's a very, very default thing. I even found this article that I wrote, I think, seven years ago, and you can actually read it, because most of the information here is still very relevant. And I believe that it's very, very underutilized in robotics. So whenever I read different papers, or I see different implementations of some models, people don't use image augmentations. Well, in practice it's a very good tool, and I believe that it's very, very applicable in robotics, because we want our models to be very, very robust to different changes. And what image augmentation does is it introduces different distortions or different transformations to the images, and while we apply these transformations, the actual information in the image stays the same, and the model should learn the actual important things on the images, rather than some artifacts. So again, I will just refer you to this article that I wrote many years ago. It 

[63:49] explains a lot of approaches and a lot of nice things, and even gives you some tools to experiment with these augmentations. In this case I just want to say that I did use some augmentations during the training process. So I apply some image transformations whenever I train my policy. But also, in the robotics-specific case, we can generate a lot of augmentations — or, again, it's often called domain randomization — during the actual rollout collection. So we have two places where we apply them. So one, image augmentations can be applied during training, and again, we can introduce a lot of different things that will make our policy more robust in the end. And the second is something that we apply during the rollout collection. And now let's see how we can apply different domain randomization using parameters of the actual environment, and how we can collect already randomized and augmented data in the first place.

[64:51] Let's look at a typical rollout. Everything that you see here is simulated. So we simulate the robot, we simulate the garments, all other objects, the table, the lights, all the physical interactions, all the physical properties, all the colors. So absolutely everything is simulated here, and it means that we can control it. So we can change any single parameter that is used to generate these things, and we will get a slightly different image. So let's look, one by one, at what we can achieve. A quick warning: there will be a lot of flashing colors in the next two minutes. First of all, we can simply replace the pattern of the garment, so it looks different, and it can generalize better to different garments. Alternatively, we can override some colors of the garment, and again it helps generalization. And the nice thing is that we can change colors even constantly, every single frame, and we will still get valid rollouts, because our policy is memoryless, and it doesn't remember the color in the previous frames. 

[65:54] This example is a bit harder to see, but I'm changing the lighting a little bit, and you can see that the intensity of the light is changing every frame. We can also move the camera position a little bit, and you can see that here the top camera is slightly rotated, and we look at the same image from a different angle. All the previous rollouts replayed the same successful episode, but here is an example where you cannot do it, because I moved the arms a little bit, and you can see that their position is slightly different than usual. And here it's not visible at all, but I changed some physical properties of the garment that can be useful for generalization. In practice, I combined all these randomizations, and also others that I didn't even mention here, and applied them randomly with some probabilities during every rollout. So this is how my rollouts look. Make sure that your randomization, your augmentations, are aligned with the environment in which you're going to deploy your model. If you want to run it in the same 

[66:57] environment where you are training your model, then you don't need to go very, very aggressive. And of course, you should never break the actual physics. And here you can see how the rollouts look for the real round. So the camera position is different, the camera resolution is different, the robots are orange, and so on. So when I prepared simulation data for the sim-to-real transfer, I applied much more aggressive augmentations compared to what I applied for the first round of the competition. And now let's talk about the rollout collection strategies. So what I mean by this: in our case, we were trying to solve multiple problems simultaneously. Technically, you can say that every garment type is a separate type of problem, and also, inside every garment type there are different garments with slightly different visual features and physical parameters, and so on. So basically all of them are slightly separate tasks, and 

[68:03] then you need to decide which tasks you actually collect data from. So the most straightforward approach is to either just run all of them, collect one episode with each type, or maybe sample them randomly. And of course this is the most straightforward way. It's the most unbiased, and I definitely used it — it was one of the most popular strategies that I used. But then there were other approaches. Imagine that you have different garments, and for some garments you already have a success rate close to 100%. Collecting more data with these garments doesn't actually improve your policy too much, because the policy is already solving it very, very well. On the other hand, you have garments that are very hard, and you have a success rate close to zero, and collecting this type of data is also not very important, because you will not get any successful rollouts, and there will be nothing to train on. So eventually these two things are not so good 

[69:05] for your policy to improve, to train. But what is really good is to collect something that has, let's say, 50% success probability, because sometimes it fails, sometimes it doesn't. You get quite a lot of space for improvement, and at the same time you collect episodes that are successful, that can be used as a positive signal to your policy, to train. So I implemented this approach, and I used a configurable target. So it wasn't always 50% — sometimes I just looked at it and it looked like I needed to focus a bit more on the harder cases, and then I set it to 40%. But the main idea is that we sample the garment that we collect an episode for depending on this garment's current success rate. The garments that have a success rate closest to our target success rate are the most useful for our training, and we try to collect them the most. Other garments are maybe not so useful, and we still sample them from time to time, but 

[70:06] not as often. So this is the curriculum approach, and I used it all the time. It was very useful. Another approach to collecting data is simply the success replay. So remember, we have a lot of augmentations. And when we run one episode, we simply collect data only for this one set of parameters that we randomly selected for this augmentation. But if it's an already-successful episode, what we can do is we can restart another episode exactly from the same state, and then, without using any policy at all, simply replay all the actions. And if we are lucky enough — so if the randomness or stochasticity of the environment doesn't hurt us too much in this case — we'll also complete this task successfully. And the thing is that we can apply very, very aggressive augmentations in this case. So, for example, we can move cameras completely to different places, we can change all the colors, we can change all the lighting, and everything. So unless we are touching physical properties — as long as we are not moving the 

[71:10] robot, we are not rotating the garment, where exactly we put it — it will still be a success, and we will get a very nice, hard-augmentation rollout that is also very useful for us during training. And I especially used this in the second part of the competition, when I needed to move from simulation to a real-life, real robot. I realized that there are a lot of inconsistencies, for example in the camera position, in simulation and in the real setup, and so on. And I aligned simulation with the real robot, and then ran a lot of successful rollouts, and just replayed them, and collected the data that is much more similar to the setup that we needed to deal with in the final round. So yeah, this is the success replay approach. On top of it, I used what I called semi-success replay. It's a bit more delegated approach. So 

[72:14] here, whenever I run the rollouts, whenever I collect a new episode, I try to detect whether we got some intermediate success, whether we, for example, reached some checkpoints in the middle. And then, if I reached the checkpoints, if let's say I solved half of the task but then, for some reason, the success probability dropped a lot and I failed the task, it means that probably I was doing something right and then just made some mistake in the end. And what I do is I collect these rollouts. Then I replay them the same as the success replay, but without very aggressive augmentations, until the point where the success probability actually dropped, or a little bit before it. And then I collect the rest of the data with the policy. And in this case we can collect extra rollouts that are eventually successful, because we managed to really solve them. In this case, because again, we were very, very close, 

[73:16] but then the model made some mistake. And it's also pretty good training data, because in this case we have one rollout where we tried and we failed starting from this state, and then another rollout where we tried and we actually succeeded starting from the same state. And this is very, very important data for reinforcement learning training. And finally, there is what I called hard mining. It's kind of a little bit the opposite. This is the case where I tried to generate very hard initial states, or very hard states in the middle of the task rollout, and then, after a few iterations of training, when the policy became better and better, I tried to replay it and resolve it eventually. I, in the end, didn't use it so often, because when you run this hard mining you have a very low success probability, because all the cases are really hard. And even so, every success is very valuable in this case, 

[74:16] because it's a success on a hard case, but you need to spend much more time to generate this one success. And then, again, I didn't ablate it very well, so I'm not sure if it's a good or bad decision, but I think that running something like curriculum is still better, and eventually it's better in this trade-off of how much time you spend versus how valuable each successful rollout is. So I used this hard mining somewhere in the middle of the training process, but by the end I switched mostly to the other approaches and other strategies. In the end I collected thousands of these rollouts. I had a lot of them. I applied some weight decay for old rollouts, so I tried to push weight as much as possible to the most recent rollouts, because my system allowed me to collect a lot of them, and it was enough for training. And the old rollouts were more like extra regularization, preventing forgetting and some other things. So I believe that this new rollout collection is very, very important. 

[75:20] So my approach, even though it's offline policy training, I think works much, much better when you do it in this more offline-plus-off-policy manner. So yeah, I recommend that even if you use offline reinforcement learning, try to collect more and more and more rollouts, and use a lot of recent rollouts in your training mix, and try to apply some lower weights for all the old rollouts. Also in the next video we'll discuss why it's important, in my setup, to reduce the weight of the old rollouts — otherwise they pollute the data with these stale value predictions. But again, this is a topic for the next video. And for now, I just hope that I managed to explain the main ideas behind the data collection that I used. Thank you for watching. I hope you enjoyed this video and learned a lot of new things. If so, please like and subscribe. Also, if you have any comments, please ask them under this video. And 

[76:22] also, as this is part of a three-video series, I will try to have some Q&A, or at least incorporate the answers to the main questions into the following videos, and go deep into it. So if you have any questions about this particular video, or maybe you read my paper or tried to run my code and you have some extra questions, or you have some questions in general that can touch some topics that I'm going to discuss in the next two videos, please let me know about it, and I will try to include it into the agenda next time. And that's it for today. Thank you for watching, and bye.